Chapter 18
Moksha Sanyasa Yoga 
 
The Yoga of Liberation Through Renunciation 
 
Arjuna said: 1. I desire to know severally, O mighty-armed, the 
essence or truth of "Renunciation, " O Hrishikesa, as also of 
'Abandonment, ' O slayer of Keshi (Krishna) .  
The chapter begins with Arju na's question, demanding of 
Lord Krishna a precise definition, and an exhaustive 
explanation, of the two term s used by the Lord in the 
Geeta, off and on, here and there. 'Renunciation' ( Sanyasa) 
and 'Abandonment' ( Tyaga) are the two technical terms 
used more than once in the Geeta. Though the question is 
asked in a spirit of academic interest, Krishna takes up the 
question in all seriousness. When a disciple expresses his 
doubt, he invariably fails to express his exact difficulty. 
However, it is the duty of the teacher to discover the 
difficulty of the student and cl ear his doubt, as even the 
Lord of the Geeta does here.  
The logic of the entire chapter revolves around the 
meanings of 'Renunciation' and 'Abandonment.' Samnyasa 
without the spirit of Tyaga is incomprehensible, and if at 
all it is ever so practised, it  can only be a sham pose. The 
bulk of the chapter maps out the tendencies, urges, 
impulses and motives, that are to be abandoned, so that 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
1195 
 
true 'Abandonment' of the undivine personality can 
effectively take place. We mu st read the chapter in this 
spirit, or else it will surely fail to influence us.  
SLAYER OF KESHI ( Keshi-nishudana) --- Keshi was a 
Daitya w h o  a t t a c k e d  K r i s h n a  i n  t h e  f o r m  o f  a  h o r s e .  
Krishna killed him by tearing him into two halves.  
DEFINING THESE TERMS AND INDICATING THE 
ENTIRE SIGNIFICANCE OF THEIR CONNOTATIONS, 
KRISHNA SAYS:  
  
The Blessed Lord said: 2. The Sages understand SAMNYASA 
to be "the renunciation of works with desire" ; the wise declare 
"the abandonment of the fruits of all actions" as TYAAGA.  
"Totally giving up all desire-prompted activities" is 
RENUNCIATION, and ABANDONMENT is "giving up of 
all anxieties for enjoying the fruits-of-action." As they 
stand, both of them read almost the same to the 
uninitiated; for, all desires are always for the fruits of our 
actions. Thus, "renouncing de sire-motivated activity" and 
"renouncing our anxiety for the fruit" would read the 
same for those who see only their superficial suggestions.  
No doubt, both mean giving up desire, but Tyaga is 
slightly different from Samnyasa; and yet, "abandonment" 
has an integral relationship wi th "renunciation." Action is 
an effort put forth in the pres ent, which, in its own time, 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
1196 
 
will, it is hoped, fulfil itself into the desired fruit. And, the 
fruit is what we reap later on as a result of the present 
action. A desireless action, therefore, belongs to the 
PRESENT, while the anxiety to enjoy the fruit (desire) is a 
disturbance of our mind regarding a FUTURE period of 
time. The fruit comes after th e action; the fruit is the 
culmination of an action undertaken in the present.  
Desire and agitation bring about restlessness, and the 
deeper the desire, the greater is the amount of dissipation 
of our energies within. A dissipated man cannot execute 
any piece of work with steady efficiency and true ardour. 
A l s o ,  i t  i s  t o  b e  n o t i c e d ,  d e s i r e  i s  a l w a y s  o r d e r e d  b y  t h e  
ego. Elimination of the ego is at once the sublimation of 
the individuality and the ascension of the individual from 
the lower realms of consciousness to the upper-most 
stratum of the effulgent universal Awareness, the One 
Eternal God.  
The tragedy of life becomes complete if a desire-ridden 
individual comes under the en dless persecution of steady 
anxiety to enjoy the fruits of his actions. Fruits-of-actions 
belong to the FUTURE and they are always ordered by  
the quality and quantity of the action in the PRESENT 
moment, and also by the circumstances available in the 
chosen field of activity. Naturally, without the 
"Abandonment" (Tyaga) of our clinging attachment to the 
expected FRUITS OF OUR ACTIONS, we will not 
discover the full potentialities of our own personality. 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
1197 
 
Without this, our activiti es will naturally become 
ineffective, and ineffective activities can never provide for 
us enjoyable fruits.  
In short, "Renunciation" is th e goal to be reached through 
the process of "Abandonment" of our moment-to-moment 
anxiety to enjoy the fruits. "Abandonment" ( Tyaaga) is the 
means to reach the goal of "Renunciation" (Samnyasa).  
Both Samnyasa and Tyaaga are disciplines in our activities. 
Krishna is never tired of em phasising the importance of 
work. Neither of these terms indicates that work should 
b e  i g n o r e d ;  o n  t h e  o t h e r  h a n d  b o t h  o f  t h e m  i n s i s t  t h a t  
WORK WE MUST. Work, however, can gain a total 
transmutation by the removal of  the things that clog our 
efficiency, and thus every piec e of work can be made to 
yield its fullest reward. Snapping the chains that shackle 
us with the past and the future, and working without 
being hustled by anxieties or henpecked by desires, in the 
full freedom and inspiration of the present, is the noblest 
way to perform actions. To a large extent, we can say that 
the definition of these two terms in the Geeta is more 
broad-minded and tolerant than the implications of these 
two words as we read in the Vedic lore.  
SHOULD THE 'IGNORANT' PERFORM WORK OR 
NOT?  
  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
1198 
 
3. That all actions should be ab andoned as evil, declare some 
philosophers; while others (declare) that acts of sacrifice, gift and 
austerity should not be relinquished.  
In the previous stanza it was conclusively declared that 
ABANDONMENT is the "way" and total 
RENUNCIATION is the "goal." On this theory of 
abandonment there is a school of philosophers, the 
Sankhyas, who declare: "ACTION SHOULD BE 
ABANDONED AS EVIL." According to them, all actions 
are productive of vasanas which cloud the realisation of 
the Self; and therefore, without exception, all actions 
should be renounced. Some commentators upon the 
Sankhyan philosophy point out that "WORK IS NOT TO 
BE ABANDONED, EXCEPT WHEN IT IS GOING IN 
WRONG CHANNELS, MOTIVATED BY DEMONIAC 
URGES LIKE PASSION, GREED, DESIRE ETC."  
The philosophers not only indicate that all seekers should 
avoid unhealthy activities which have, in their reactions, a 
deadening influence upon the spiritual beauty in man, but 
also advise that every man should engage himself in 
creative, character-moulding, moral-rebuilding work that 
can aid the individual's personality-integration. This latter 
school of thinkers recommends that 'sacrifice' ( Yajna), 
'charity' ( Daana) and 'austerity' ( Tapas) should never be 
abandoned.  
As students of the Geeta, we should know that Krishna 
wants Arjuna only to renoun ce all evil activities, and 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
1199 
 
perform worldly work in a spirit of dedicated, selfless 
devotion. Krishna's Geeta calls upon man to make work 
itself the greatest homage unto the Supreme; this is 
SPIRITUAL 'Sadhana.'  
THE LORD'S DECREE IS THAT THE 'IGNORANT' 
SHOULD PERFORM WORK. NOW, AS TO THESE 
DIVERGENT VIEWS:  
  
4. Hear from Me the conclusion or the final truth, about this 
"abandonment, " O best of the Bharatas; "abandonment, " 
verily, O best of men, has been declared to be of three kinds.  
Lord Krishna is now promising Arjuna that he will 
scientifically explain what constitutes Tyaaga and under 
what headings this spirit of 'abandonment' can be 
considered.  
For a mortal mind, GIVING UP is no easy task; acquisition 
and aggrandisement are the very life-breath of man's 
mind. Naturally therefore, Krishna has to invoke the best 
in Arjuna by addressing him as the "best among Bharatas" 
(Bharata-Sattama) and as a "tiger among men" ( Purusha-
Vyaaghra).  
"Abandonment" ( Tyaaga), for purposes of study and 
understanding, is three-fold . All through the Geeta this 
three-fold classification is followed, and everywhere we 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
1200 
 
find that it is classed as the 'pure' (Sattwic), the 'passionate' 
(Rajasic) and the 'dull' (Tamasic).  
WHAT THEN IS THE FINAL DECREE? THE LORD 
SAYS:  
  
5. Acts of sacrifice, charity and austerity should not be 
abandoned, but should be perfor med; worship, charity, and also 
austerity, are the purifiers of even the 'wise. '  
What has been said earlier has been accepted and 
emphasised. Practice of worship ( Yajna), charity ( Daana), 
and austerity ( Tapas) should not be abandoned. We have 
already found, in the previous chapter, that these, when 
properly pursued, bring about a brilliant discipline within 
and create conditions unde r which alone, the highest 
spiritual unfoldment and th e final experience of the 
Infinite are possible. Krishna says here that these can 
"purify even thoughtful men." Men of evolutionary 
tendencies, who seek freedom from their personality-
obsessions must, with devotion and the right attitude of 
mind, perform Yajnas, Daana and Tapas. Thereby they can 
discover an endless amount of inner peace and balance.  
OBLIGATORY WORKS SHOULD BE PERFORMED 
WITHOUT ATTACHMENT:  
  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
1201 
 
6. But even these actions should  be performed leaving aside 
attachment and the fruits, O Partha ; this is my certain and best 
belief.  
Even these actions, namely, 'Sacrifice' ( Yajna), 'Charity' 
(Daana) and 'Austerity' ( Tapas) should be performed 
"LEAVING ATTACHMENTS AND FRUITS." The term 
"attachment" in the Geeta has a peculiar flavour, and 
throughout, this term has been used to indicate the spirit 
in which an ego-centric personality will come to work in 
any field of activity, while fulfilling its own ego-centric 
desires. Thus, an ego and it s desires are the component 
parts of attachments. When an  ego strives to fulfil its own 
burning desires, it comes to live in a certain relationship 
with the world of things an d objects around --- this wrong 
relationship is called "ATTACHMENT."  
Once an individual starts working under the poison of 
"attachment," he comes to entertain an unintelligent, self-
destructive anxiety to gain and enjoy the results of his 
actions. Long before the acti ons are completed, one's hope 
and hunger for their fruits can present themselves to 
weave a charm of their own, benumbing one's efficiency 
in the field of the action undertaken.  
The idea that CHARITY, SACRIFICE and AUSTERITY 
must be performed in an attitude of "detachment," 
"renouncing all anxieties for the enjoyment of the fruits" is, 
Krishna admits, his own personal opinion ( matam). It is 
not, however, purely an original Krishna-creed, but is 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
1202 
 
perfectly in line with the technique of selfless action as 
advised in all the Hindu scriptures.  
T o  b e  r i d  o f  a t t a c h m e n t  a n d  t o  b e  f r e e  f r o m  a n x i e t i e s  
regarding the fruits that are ye t to present themselves as a 
reward for the work undertaken in the present, are the 
main limbs of the Krishna-creed in the Geeta. To live this 
Krishna-way-of-action is to assure for ourselves a healthy 
inner equipment, which can tenderly guide us to the 
peaks of Supermanhood. The loving term used here by 
Krishna in addressing Arjuna has its own appeal to the 
Prince. It recommends to him the Krishna-theory of 
"abandonment" (Tyaaga) as explained in this stanza.  
THEREFORE, FOR A SEEKER OF SPIRITUAL 
LIBERATION, WORK IS UNAVOIDABLE; AND WITH A 
PROPER SPIRIT OF 'TYAGA', WORK CAN HELP HIM 
ON HIS PATH. THE 'TAMSIC TYAAGA' IS:  
  
7. Verily, the renunciation of "ob ligatory actions" is not proper; 
the abandonment of the same from  delusion is declared to be 
TAMASIC (dull) .  
Abandonment of obligatory duties is considered by the 
Lord as the lowest and the darkest. Every individual has 
his own obligations to himself and to others in society. 
They include both the unavoidable DAILY DUTIES, as 
well as the SPECIAL DUTIES that arise on special 
occasions in the life of an in dividual, and in the society of 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
1203 
 
the times. Therefore, as long as an individual is a member 
of the society, enjoying the social life, and demanding 
protection and profit from th e society, he has no right, 
according to the Hindu code-of-living, to abandon his 
"obligatory duties."  
Even if one abandons one's moral duties in ignorance, one 
is not excused; for, as in the civil laws of the modern 
world and in the physical laws  of the phenomenal world, 
so in the spiritual kingdom al so, "ignorance of the law is 
no excuse." Out of ignorance and lack of proper thinking, 
if an individual ignores hi s obligations and refuses to 
serve the world he is living in, that 'abandonment' is 
considered as 'dull' (Tamasic).  
THE RAJASIC TYAAGA IS:  
  
8. He who, from fear of bodily trouble, abandons action because 
it is painful, thus performing a RAJASIC (passionate) 
abandonment, obtains not the fruit of "abandonment. "  
Someone may come to give up his individual obligatory 
duties "BECAUSE THEY ARE PAINFUL" or "THROUGH 
FEAR OF BODILY SUFFERING ." The 'relinquishment' 
thus practised falls under the "passionate" type ( Rajasic). 
This clearly shows in its unsa id suggestions that a man of 
action and passion (Rajas) w ill readily undertake to act 
and fulfil his obligatory duties if they are not painful, and 
are not too fatiguing. To become a man of action, fulfilling 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
1204 
 
all obligations and performing all duties without 
sacrificing one's own personal comforts, is no heroic life at 
all. Such actions have no special reward. In fact, Krishna 
says: "HE SHALL ATTAIN NO FRUIT WHATSOEVER 
OF HIS ABANDONMENT."  
Performance of one's obligatory duties is itself the most 
glorious of all forms of " Tyaaga," and it can be considered 
doubly so, when it involves a certain amount of sacrifice 
of one's own personal conven ience and bodily comfort. 
Arjuna himself was hesitating to fight the battle which 
was his obligatory duty. Arjuna's  'relinguishment' of this 
duty could be considered as falling under this category of 
Rajasic Tyaaga.  
Real abandonment should always lead us on to the ampler 
fields of self-expression, push us into the fuller ways of 
living, and introduce us to the greater experiences of joy. 
A bud ABANDONS itself to become a flower, the flower 
GIVES UP its soft petals and its enchanting fragrance and 
gains for itself the richer status of a fruit. Every real 
ABANDONMENT should haul us up into a nobler status 
of fulfilment.  
WHAT THEN IS THE SATTWIC ABANDONMENT?  
  
9. Whatever "obligatory action" is done, O Arjuna, merely 
because it ought to be done, ab andoning "attachment and also 
fruit, " that abandonment is regarded as SATTWIC (pure) .  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
1205 
 
Those who execute thoroughly all their obligatory duties 
"because they are to be done" ( karyam iti), because to 
remain without accomplishing them is almost death to 
them --- fall under the Sattwic (pure) variety. They believe 
that certain acts of 'relinquishment' MUST be done, for 
otherwise, according to them, it is just insufferably 
indecent. When such persons, under these inspiring ideas, 
come to serve the community, or work in any field, they 
provide us with examples of the Sattwic type of 
'relinquishment.'  
Activities have certain un avoidable encumbrances. All 
that the Lord says in the Geet a amounts only to this; that 
we must act on without these encumbrances curtailing 
and limiting our freedom of action. Thus, the tyaga of the 
good (Sattwic), or real tyaga, means doing actions with the 
correct mental attitude." This may seem strange, but those 
who have carefully gone through these three stanzas 
explaining the true type of tyaga, must have understood 
that all these discussions were no t so much on what is to 
be 'relinquished' but as to HOW we must 'abandon,' and 
in WHICH FIELD we must act. In short, Lord Krishna's 
concept of Tyaga condemns abandonment of the world 
and our duties in it. To the Lord in the Geeta, tyaga is a 
subjective renunciation of a ll inner selfishness and desire, 
which limit the freedom of the individual in his field-of-
activity. It is something like the abandonment that 
everyone practises in his dining-room; renunciation of 
hunger by positively taking the food!  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
1206 
 
In these three stanzas the abandonment ( Tyaga) discussed 
is not "the ABANDONMENT of actions" but 
"ABANDONMENT of such things  within our subjective 
personality that block the free flow of our own 
possibilities." Tyaga makes an active man a more potential 
worker in the world.  
Acting in the world outside, renouncing both the ego and 
the ego-centric desires, an in dividual comes to exhaust his 
vasanas, and grows in his inward purity.  
HOW DOES SUCH A PURE MAN, PURIFIED 
THROUGH ' SATTWIC TYAGA,' GAIN THE HIGHEST 
SPIRITUAL EXPERIENCE?  
  
10. The abandoner, soaked in puri ty, being intelligent, with all 
his doubts cut asunder, hates not disagreeable action, nor is he 
attached to an agreeable action.  
The previous stanza would, at the outset, look as an 
impossible thesis to any strong man of action and 
adventure. Perhaps the royal heart of Arjuna could not 
comprehend such a person wh o fulfils his obligatory duty 
"only because it ought to be done" ( karyamiti)" renouncing 
attachment and fruit." As though answering the look of 
surprise on Arjuna's face, which faithfully registers his 
failure to appreciate the idea, Krishna gives in this stanza 
a more elaborate picture of such an individual.  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
1207 
 
A man established in Sattwic abandonment never hates, 
nor does he ever feel attach ed. He is not miserable in 
disagreeable environments nor does he get attached to the 
circumstances and schemes-of-things which are agreeable 
to his taste. He does his duties under all circumstances 
agreeable or disagreeable, without feeling elated when he 
finds himself on the "peaks," or feeling dejected when he 
discovers himself in the "pits" of life.  
He is overwhelmed neither by extreme joy, nor by 
extreme sorrow; equanimity becomes his essential nature. 
He stands as a rock, ever at ease, and watches with an 
unbroken balance-of-vision, the waves of happenings 
rising and falling all around him at all times. He is, in 
short, independent of the happenings in the outer world 
around him.  
When, to such a man of Sattwic Tyaga, impulses such as 
jealousy, anger, passion, greed etc., come, he does not get 
involved in those impulses, as we do in our attachments 
and identifications with them. That is, a man of 
abandonment (tyaga) readily discovers in himself a secret 
faculty to abandon his identification with the false, the 
lower instincts in himself. He does not become a victim of 
his own mental impressions ( vasanas); he stands ever free 
and surely apart from the tumults of his mind.  
Such a man is said to be an educated and cultured man. 
An uncultured man is like a dry leaf that is tossed hither 
and thither by every passing breeze; is like a reed upon 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
1208 
 
the bosom of the sea, rising and falling in the mad revelry 
of the tireless waves. It is the privilege of the animal alone 
to get faithfully coloured by its own instincts and act 
according to the dictates of its impulses. It is only man, the 
inheritor of an intellect, who can enquire into the nature of 
the rising waves of impulses, judge them in the light of the 
ideal he holds onto in himself,  and, if need be, stand apart 
from them and allow them to die away.  
But ordinarily, an individual finds it impossible to stand 
apart and live, to act independently of his impulses. 
According to the Geeta, this is because man has allowed 
his faculty of 'abandonment' ( Tyaga) to die away. A Tyagi 
is he who has cultivated this habit to live intelligently in 
life, practising from moment to moment the 
'abandonment' of all the anim al whisperings in himself, 
and following diligently the Melody of the Soul. Such a 
man is established in Sattwic Tyaga.  
In order that one may come to judge correctly and 
renounce the false, one must have a very clear and steady 
picture of the Perfect in oneself. Medha-shakti is not merely 
the intellect's power of understanding or reasoning, but it 
is also the intellect's FACULTY TO MEMORISE AND 
RETAIN THINGS. A cultured man of unbroken equipoise 
and steady understanding must have a constant memory 
of: (1) the constituents of the field of his activity, (2) the 
instruments through which he contacts the world outside, 
(3) his own essential infinitely divine nature, and (4) his 
exact relationship with the world-of-objects when he is 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
1209 
 
contacting it through his sens es. Such a person is called 
Medhaavee, "A MAN OF FIRM UNDERSTANDING." And 
in case his knowledge be spotted with patches of doubts 
or slightly poisoned by traces of false knowledge, there 
will be in him endless confusio ns, which in their turn will 
bring about wrong judgements. Therefore, Krishna 
indicates that a man of Sattwic Tyaaga is one whose 
"DOUBT IS CLEFT."  
The highest type of Tyaga is not, perhaps, abundantly 
found except in a minority who have accomplished their 
detachments from all their matter vestures completely. 
But to the majority, identification with the body-mind-
intellect equipment is so natural that they have the SENSE 
OF AGENCY and come to live in the world, conditioned 
by the happenings around.  
SUCH AN AVERAGE MAN,  WHO WORKS WITH AN 
EGO AND ATTACHMENT, MUST LEARN TO WORK, 
AT LEAST RENOUNCING THE FRUIT. KRISHNA 
EXPLAINS:  
  
11. Verily, it is not possible fo r an embodied being to abandon 
actions entirely, but he who relinqu ishes "the fruits of actions" 
is verily called a 'relinquisher' (TYAAGI) .  
Actions we will have to perform. Without action no living 
organism can continue living. Existence itself is the 
manifestation of life's activities. To remain without doing 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
1210 
 
anything is itself an action, and the physiological and 
psychological actions continue upto the grave. Anything 
that has a body, even a unicellular organism, can never 
hope to abandon ALL activities. Actions are the insignia of 
life. It is the fragrance in the flower-of-existence. Where 
there is no action, there life has ended; there existence has 
withered away --- the substance has dried up... stinking 
death has come.  
Since all of us are embodied, and therefore, cannot 
abandon all activities as long  as we live, the only choice 
left to us is to direct and discipline all our actions in such a 
way as to bring a harmony into our inner life and a 
dynamic rhythm into our outer duties.  
If Tyaga of the Sattwic type is not possible for all of us due 
to our attachments to the world of matter, certainly we 
can practise the 'abandonment' of at least our clinging 
attachments and anxieties for the fruits of our actions. 
Action cannot be completely abandoned by one who is 
conditioned by the gross, subtle and causal bodies. Such 
an individual --- and most of  u s  a t  t h i s  s t a g e  o f  o u r  
evolution fall under this category --- is advised by Krishna 
to abandon his anxiety to enjoy the fruits of his actions 
which are yet to come in a fu ture period of time and act 
diligently, entirely, and enthus iastically in the present. A 
man who thus abandons the thirst to enjoy the fruits of his 
action is called a tyagi.  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
1211 
 
NOW WHAT IS THE BENEFIT WHICH COMES FROM 
'TYAAGA'? THE LORD ANSWERS:  
  
12. The threefold fruit of action , evil, good and mixed-accrues, 
after death, only to those who have  no spirit of 'abandonment' ; 
never to total relinquishers.  
The results of all actions depend, it is said, upon the 
quality of the actions. Abandonment ( tyaga) has already 
been described as belonging to three different categories. 
Here we have a discussion of the different types of 
reactions that would accrue when the different types of 
tyaga are practised.  
Projection of a wilful desire in the world outside is an 
action, and according to the purity of the motive and the 
serenity of composure of the actor, a psychological 
reaction is left behind at the end of every activity. The 
mind has an instinctive habit of repeating itself. Future 
thoughts faithfully follow the foot-prints left by the past 
thoughts. Thus, actions in  the world determine the 
"thought tendencies" of the human mind, and these 
tendencies ( vasanas) condition the mental equipment and 
order our reactions to the things that are happening 
around.  
The fruit-of-action, in philosophy, is not only its 
manifested results in the material world, but also the 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
1212 
 
subtle constitutional change s it leaves in the thought-
personality of man.  
The total reactions gained by the mind's working in the 
world, according to Lord Krishna, fall under three distinct 
types: (1) the disagreeable or the calamitous --- meaning 
those that are positively bad; (2) agreeable or non-
calamitous --- meaning positively good; (3) the mixed type 
of balanced or average --- wherein the tendencies are 
balanced equally between the good and the bad.  
In the constant flow of time , the PRESENT determines the 
immediate FUTURE, and therefore, these tendencies, in 
their different textures, must necessarily determine our 
reactions to our environments in the IMMEDIATE future. 
If we extend this theory to the very last moment of our 
days in this embodiment, it becomes amply evident that, 
after the departure from here through death, our next 
embodiment and the general typ e of environment that we 
will find ourselves in, would be determined by the type of 
tendencies produced by our actions. This is what is called 
the "reincarnation theory" in the Sanatana Dharma.  
If the vasanas are good ( Sattwic), then a joyous field of 
prosperity and happiness would be the only realm 
wherein such a mind would discover its destiny. Those 
who are entertaining and delib erately cultivating the low 
animal-vasanas in themselves will find for themselves a 
complete fulfilment only by appearing in the lower strata 
of life. When the 'tendencies'  for good and bad are almost 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
1213 
 
equal (mishram), then we enter into this world-of-action --- 
the world in which we are now living --- the world of the 
intelligent man. No doubt, in each of us there is a call of 
the "higher" constantly leading us towards an 
undetermined and indeterminable ideal, but there are also 
the barkings and the brayings , the hissings and the roars, 
of the "lower" in us, constantly confusing and 
systematically distracting our vision of the ideal.  
If an individual were to iden tify himself with the higher 
and live up to the ideal as best as he can, the "higher" 
vasanas will multiply and ultimately silence the "lower" 
completely. If, one the other hand, as is the fashion in the 
modern world, we allow ourselves to be tempted by the 
"lower" and identify with the animal-impulses in us, they 
will multiply and make us a caricature of the Divine that 
we really are. In short, in the tug-of-war between the 
'higher' and the 'lower,' th e determining factor is the 
individual's own personality.  
Both these vasanas g r o w ,  b e  t h e y  g o o d  o r  b a d ,  a n d  i n  
either case, there is still a manifestation as birth in the 
realm of pangs and perils. The transcendence of the 
experiencer --- personality is  possible only when the 
conditionings have totally ended and the vasanas are 
rendered powerless to hold the Pure Spirit, seemingly, at 
ransom.  
To explain further the difference between 'abandonment' 
(Tyaaga) and 'renunciation' ( Samnyasa), the Lord says here 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
1214 
 
that for a man-of-renunciation there is no reaction either 
to the actions done in the PAST or to actions undertaken 
by him in the PRESENT.  
This idea clearly brings out the subtle difference that the 
Geeta makes between Tyaaga and Sanyasa. Earlier we 
found that tyaaga i s  t h a t  c a p a c i ty  i n  us  w i th  w h i c h ,  fro m 
moment to moment, we withdraw ourselves from the 
impulses of our mind; while Samnyasa is the total 
renunciation of the entire "tendencies," both good and bad 
--- from their crystallisation as the "ego."  
The Geeta-technique for the rehabilitation of man's 
personality, so beautifully elaborated and exhaustively 
discussed, when briefly put would be: (a) the seeker first 
gets detached from the lower sensuous cravings and 
passions by identifying himself with the nobler ideals of 
self-control and moral-perfection; (b) a mind so 
conditioned becomes tamer than a mind goaded by 
sensuality. This purified mind develops in itself the 
required amount of subtle powers of thinking, of 
consistent self-application and of steady contemplation; 
(c) on realising the Pure 'Be '-ness, all becomings end. To 
the pure Self there is no becoming; the "tendencies" of the 
mind ( vasanas) cannot shackle the Spirit. Its subtle 
Presence cannot but be ever Immaculate and 
Unconditioned.  
The "pleasant," the "unpleasant" and the "mixed" types of 
reaction (Karma Phala) reach only those who have an ego-
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
1215 
 
centric sense of identification  with the actions as well as 
their resultant reactions. Those who abandon ( tyaagee) 
both the sense of ego and the anxiety for the action-results 
are not caught in the clutch es of 'reactions'-actions. 
Memories of the past are the fertile fields where desires 
are cultivated and it is only in the future that the fruits are 
borne by the trees of actions.  Renouncing our indulgence 
with the inheritance of the past and leaving all our 
anxieties for the future, to se rve the world as a service to 
the Lord is abandonment --- tyaaga.  
AFTER THUS HANDLING THE THEME OF 
'ABANDONMENT' IN GENERAL, KRISHNA NOW 
TAKES UP A CLOSER EXAMINATION OF IT, 
DISSECTING THE VERY CO MPONENT PARTS THAT 
CONSTITUTE WORK:  
  
13. Learn from Me, O mighty-armed, these five causes for the 
accomplishment of all actions, as declared in the SANKHYA 
(UPANISHAD) system, which is the end of all actions.  
When Arjuna was thus told conclusively that action could 
be performed without ego-centric desires and clinging 
attachment to the fruits, as an intelligent enquirer, he had 
every right to ask: "What constitutes an action?" To lay 
bare the inner essence of ac tion, Krishna analyses the 
anatomy of work --- the extern al structure of action, and 
the physiology of action --- the inner inspirations, motives 
and urges in work.  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
1216 
 
Addressing Arjuna as mighty-armed, Krishna declares 
that, for the real accomplishment, fulfilment or 
achievement of an action, fi ve aspects of action are 
necessarily to be disciplined  and marshalled. These five 
are the "limbs of action" without which no action is ever 
possible. When these five aspects work in happy co-
ordination, the undertaking is assured of the greatest 
success, be it secular or sacred , material or spiritual. The 
term "Mighty-armed" is used to invoke the adventurous 
heroism in Arjuna, for, a large share of daring courage, 
consistency of purpose, faith in oneself and intellectual 
heroism are necessary, if one is to discipline one's actions 
and successfully accomplish a thorough cultural 
development within.  
In this stanza, the Geetaacharya confesses that this 
enumeration of the aspects that constitute an action is not 
his own original contribution, but it is exactly what is said 
in the Saankhyan philosophy. The Saankhyan philosophy as 
a separate text no longer exists... perhaps, here, the word 
Saankhyan indicates only the Upanishads. The existing 
Saankhyan books do not mention these five-fold categories. 
It is reasonable to suppose that at the time of Vyasa there 
might have been some books discussing this topic which 
are now lost to us. However, one thing is clear: that this 
five-fold division, which the Lord discusses in the 
following stanzas, faithfully follows the philosophy of the 
Geeta as discussed so far. Th e Geeta has declared that all 
actions cease when the knowledge of the Self dawns, so 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
1217 
 
that the Advaita commentator concludes: " Vedanta, which 
imparts to us knowledge, is THE END OF ACTIONS."  
HEREIN THE LORD ENUMERATES FIVE FACTORS 
WHICH ARE THE CONSTITUENT PARTS IN ALL 
ACTIONS:  
  
14. The "seat" (body) , the doer (ego) , the various organs-of-
perception, the different function s of various organs-of-action, 
and also the presiding deity, the fifth.  
The promise made in the previo us stanza is being fulfilled 
herein and Lord Krishna enum erates the five component 
parts that go into the constitution of any "action." We have 
already discussed that the enumeration as it stands today 
in this stanza does not correspond to the Saankhyan 
declaration. Commentators interpret these terms, each 
slightly differently from th e others, and this five-fold 
division being rather obscure, the various explanations of 
the commentators are not very helpful to a practical 
student. However, we can see in these five terms the 
twenty-four fold division of Prakriti, which the Saankhyans 
hold and follow.  
Every work is undertaken wi th the help of the "body" 
(Adhishthaanam), for the body is the gateway for the 
stimuli to enter as well as for the responses to exist. A 
body in itself can neither receive the world nor react to it 
unless there is the "ego" ( Kartaa) functioning in and 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
1218 
 
through it. There must be an  intelligent personality, 
presiding over its own desires, wanting to fulfil them and 
thus constantly seeking a fulfilment through its body 
activities. The ego sets the bo dy in continuous activity. 
When an ego, thus riddled with its own desires, wants to 
seek its fulfilment in the world of objects outside, it 
certainly needs "instruments" ( Karanam) of perception. 
Without these, the inner personality cannot come to 
contact the field of enjoyment and find satisfaction in it.  
The term "function" ( Cheshtaa) here has been commented 
upon by Shankara as the physiological activities, known 
as Praana, Apaana, etc. No doubt it is sufficiently 
explanatory to all students who have a knowledge of the 
traditions in Vedantic thought. But to a lay student this 
explanation might be rather con fusing. As a result of the 
physiological activities ( Praana, Apaana etc.) the health of 
the body gets toned up and it  must flow out in its own 
vigour and enthusiasm thro ugh the organs-of-action. 
Thus, for our understanding of these enumerations, we 
can directly take the term "function" ( Cheshtaa) used here 
as indicating the organs-of-action.  
The organs-of-perception are presided over by the five 
great elements. These presiding deities are technically 
called Devas, and they indicate p articular functions and 
faculties in the sense-organs, such as the "power of vision" 
of the eye, the "power of audition " in the ears etc. i. e., the 
sense-organs must have their full vigour and must 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
1219 
 
function properly in order to play their part in any field of 
work.  
Stripping off all these details of explanations, if we re-read 
the stanza, it merely enumerates the constituent parts of 
every action. They are: (1) th e body, (2) the ego, (3) the 
organs-of-perception, (4) the organs-of-action and, (5) the 
five elemental forces. The stanza is dedicated merely to 
enumerating these five aspects without which no ego-
centric activity is ever possible.  
HOW CAN THESE FIVE BECOME THE COMPONENT 
PARTS IN EVERY HUMAN ACTIVITY?  
  
15. Whatever action a man perf orms by his body, speech and 
mind --- whether right, or the reverse --- these five are its 
causes.  
The items listed above must all come into full play in 
order to accomplish any work, and therefore, these five 
component parts are called the causes of all actions. To 
show that there is no exception, the Lord says that 
whatever action a man might undertake, be it by his body, 
speech or mind, and that too whether right or wrong, in 
every expression of action there is the play of all these five 
essential parts.  
These five constitute the equipment of action, and the 
Spirit, the eternally Actionless, conditioned by the 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
1220 
 
intellectual desires, behaves A S  T H O U G H  i t  i s  a n  e g o  
(Jiva); and this individualised personality, forgetting its 
own State-of-Perfection demanding satisfaction through 
sense gratifications, making use of the faculties of sense-
enjoyment, strives in the worl d-of-objects to achieve, to 
gain, to aggrandise. Here we should not forget, in our 
haste, to grasp clearly that the five-fold division is the 
description of the "engine un der the bonnet" and not of 
the "petrol;" and yet, "petrol" in itself cannot make the 
travel pleasant and successful  --- nor can the "engine" 
move without the "petrol."  
A motor vehicle becomes an automobile only when 
"petrol" plays through the "engine," and when the driver 
can, by his faculties, take th e vehicle to its destination, 
which is determined by the demand or the desire of the 
owner of the vehicle. If this analogy is understood, we can 
correctly evaluate this portion of Krishna's enumeration, 
and can truly appreciate what the Lord means when he 
says "these five are the causes" of all work.  
ALL THESE ENUMERATIONS AND EXPLANATIONS 
OF THE LAST TWO STANZAS ADD UP TO THE 
CONCLUSION THAT THE 'SENSE-OF-AGENCY' OF 
THE SELF IS AN ILLUSION:  
  
16. Now, such being the case, verily he who --- owing to his 
untrained understanding --- looks upon his Self, which is 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
1221 
 
"alone" (never conditioned by the "engine" ) , as the doer, he, of 
perverted intelligence, sees not.  
In the previous stanzas we fo und that action belongs to 
the realm of matter, no doubt IN THE PRESENCE of the 
Spirit. Failing to discriminate thus between the 
equipments of action and the actionless Spirit, which, in 
an unhealthy combination between them, comes to 
manifest as the "actor" (doer), the poor ego-centric 
personality so born comes to pant and sigh at its own 
disappointments and failures, or dances and jumps at its 
own joys and successes. Th e moment an individual 
becomes aware of these inner mechanisms and their play, 
the delusory ego-centric individuality ends as it becomes a 
mere myth of the mind, a delusory phantom of a 
midsummer, mid-day dream.  
THIS BEING THE CASE ( Tatra evam sati) --- In all such 
actions, whether good or bad,  as undertaken by the body, 
speech or mind, the essentia l component parts are the 
body, ego, organs-of-perception, organs-of-action and the 
elements; thus all actions belo ng to matter. But the Spirit, 
which is the essential nature, in  identifying Itself with the 
matter-vestures, comes to liv e through the disturbing 
destinies as the ever-changing man. All pangs and joys, all 
failures and successes, all imperfections and impediments, 
belong to the ego, which is the Spirit considering Itself as 
conditioned by these components of action. The Supreme 
Pure Self ( Kevalam Aatmaanam) is misunderstood by the 
ordinary man to be the actor ( Kartaaram), and in the 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
1222 
 
consequent ego-sense, the divinity is forgotten and the 
individual comes to despair. The causes of this 
misunderstanding have been indicated here. Untempered 
reason ( Akrita Buddhi) and perverted mind ( Durmati) are 
the maladjustments in an individual, because of which, 
right recognition of one's own divinity is not constantly 
maintained within. The implication of the statement is 
that, if a seeker can integ rate himself ---  through the 
process of disciplining his re asoning faculty and guiding 
his mind away from his intellectual perversities --- that 
individual will come to experience within himself that it is 
only the five-fold components made up of matter that are 
indulging in the agitations of the outer activity.  
ELUCIDATING THE FOREGOING IDEAS MORE 
VIVIDLY, THE LORD CONTINUES:  
  
17. He who is free from the egoistic  notion, whose intelligence is 
not tainted (by good or evil) , though he slays these people, he 
slays not, nor is he bound (by the action) .  
So far we have been told th at the realm-of-matter is the 
field of all activity, and the weeds of sorrows and 
agitations can grow only therein. The Spirit, the farmer, 
has an existence independent of this field and yet the 
farmer, in his identification with the self-projections on the 
field, feels happy or unhappy  according to the condition 
of the field at any given moment.  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
1223 
 
Similarly, it is our unhealth y contact created by our self-
projections on to the matter-envelopments around us that 
has given rise to the 'ego', which in its turn comes to suffer 
the buffetings of life. Therefore, Krishna says that "HE 
WHO IS FREE FROM THE SENSE OF EGOISM" and 
whose "INTELLIGENCE IS NOT TAINTED" by false 
values of possession, acquisition, aggrandisement, etc., 
does no action even though activities take place all around 
and even through him; "THOUGH HE SLAYS THESE 
PEOPLE, HE SLAYS NOT."  
This does not mean that a man-of-Wisdom, who has 
withdrawn from his false evaluation of matter, will no 
longer act in the world. He will not remain like a stone 
statue. The statement only means, that even while he is 
acting in the world, to him it is all a self-entertaining 
game. It is always our ego-centric clinging that leaves 
impressions (vasanas) in our mind and thus actions of the 
past come to goad us on to more and more activities. A 
man-of-Perfection who has th e necessary discriminative 
intellect, learns to detach himself and act, and therefore, in 
him the footprints of the past activities cannot beat out 
any deepening footpath.  
Krishna says: "THOUGH HE KILLS, HE KILLS NOT; 
NOR IS HE BOUND." If we were to compare the results of 
the lusty, passionate acts of some self-seeking murderer, 
with the honourable heroic activities of some devotedly 
dedicated warrior championing the cause of his country's 
freedom and independence, we shall easily understand 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
1224 
 
the above assertion of the Lord. The murderer develops 
vasanas, and propelled by his tendencies, he again and 
again commits heinous crimes and disturbs the society, 
while the hero on the battle-front, though he too kills 
many, returns from the battle-front as a more educated, 
noble, and refined personality.  In the former, there is the 
"ego," and therefore, the foul vasanas get registered; while 
in the latter, the soldier's mind was fixed in his love for the 
country, and therefore, the murderous activity on the 
battle-front could not leave in him any ugly mental 
residue. Once the ego is surre ndered in the consciousness 
of the Divine, the "BONDAGE OF VASANAS CAN NO 
MORE REMAIN IN HIM."  
AFTER THUS DESCRIBING THE "CONSTITUENTS 
THAT MAKE UP ANY ACTION," THE 
GEETAACHARYA DESCRIBES THE "IMPULSES TO 
KARMA" AND "THE BASIS OF KARMA":  
  
18. Knowledge, the known and knower form the three-fold 
"impulse to action" ; the organs, the action, the agent, form the 
three-fold "basis of action. "  
In the scientific treatment of the subject-matter, Lord 
Krishna had already explained the constituent parts that 
make up an action and also  indicated that the entire 
assemblage is of matter only. Continuing the theme, he is 
now trying to explain the three-fold impulses that propel 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
1225 
 
activity ( Karma-Chodanaa) and also the basis-of-action 
(Karma-Sangraha).  
The "impulse to action," according to Krishna, is a 
threefold arrangement made up of "KNOWLEDGE 
(Jnaanam), THE KNOWN ( Jneyam) AND THE KNOWER 
(Parijnaataa)." These three are called technically in Vedanta 
as the ' Triputi': indicating the 'experiencer,' the 
'experienced' and the resu ltant 'experience' --- the 
'knower,' the 'known' and the 'knowledge.' Without these 
three no knowledge is ever possible, as all "impulses to 
act" arise out of a play of these three. The EXPERIENCER, 
playing in the field of the EXPERIENCED, gains for 
himself the various EXPERIENCES; and these constitute 
the secret contents of all actions.  
The "impulse to action" ca n spring either from the 
"experiencer," in the form of a DESIRE, or from the 
"experienced," in the form of TEMPTATION, or from the 
"experience" in the form of similar MEMORIES of some 
past enjoyments. Beyond these three there is no other 
"impulse to action" (Karma-Chodanaa).  
The "impulse to action," when it has arisen, must also find 
a field to act in; and the "basis for action" ( Karma-Sangraha) 
is constituted of the "instrum ents," the "reaction" and the 
"agent" (the actor). This "sense of agency" expressed by the 
ego, can maintain itself only as long as it holds a vivid 
picture of the "fruit of its ac tion" which it wants to gain. 
Fruit, meaning the profit or the gain that is intended to be 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
1226 
 
gained by the action, is indica ted here by the term 'work' 
(Karma). According to Shri Shankaraacharya ' Karma' here 
means the end.  
When a desirer, the agent, encouraged by this constant 
attraction towards a satisfying end, wants to achieve it, he 
must necessarily have the instruments-of-action 
(Karanam). These instruments include not only the organs-
of-perception-and-action, but also the inner equipments of 
the mind and the intellect. It ca nnot be very difficult for a 
student to understand that: (1) an AGENT having a desire, 
(2) maintaining in his mind a clear picture of the END or 
the goal, (3) with all the necessary instruments to act 
thereupon, would be the sum total contents of any activity 
(Karma-Sangraha). If any one of the above three items is 
absent, action cannot take place. These three ( Karanam, 
Kartaa and Karma) are together designated as the parts of 
the "Karma-assembly," the "basis of all Karma s" --- (Karma-
Sangraha).  
Thus having roughly indicated in this stanza the threefold 
"impulses of action" and the th ree-fold "basis for action," 
Krishna continues to explain in His Song why different 
people act so differently under different impulses and 
obey different basis in their actions. He divides each one 
of them under the three categories of human nature: the 
'good' ( Sattwic), the 'passionate' ( Rajasic), and the 'dull' 
(Tamasic).  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
1227 
 
THE LORD NOW PROCEEDS TO SHOW THE THREE-
FOLD DISTINCTIONS IN EACH ONE OF THE ABOVE, 
ACCORDING TO THE THREE PREDOMINANT 
NATURES --- THE 'GOOD,' THE 'PASSIONATE' AND 
THE 'DULL':  
  
19. 'Knowledge, ' 'action, ' and 'actor' are declared in the 
Science of Temperaments (gunas) to be of three kinds only, 
according to the distinctions of temperaments; hear them also 
duly.  
As an introduction to what is to follow immediately, here 
it is said that "knowledge," "action," and the "actor" 
(agent), all the three becaus e of the difference of the 
temperament in the individuals, at the given time of 
observation, fall under a three-fold division. This 
classification is being exhaustively explained in the 
following stanzas.  
Guna is the preponderance of a given type of temperament 
in one's inner nature. The human mind and intellect 
function constantly, but they always come to function 
under the different "climatic conditions" within our mind. 
These varying climates of the mind are called the three 
gunas: the 'good,' the 'passionate' and the 'dull.'  
Under each of these tempe raments the entire human 
personality behaves differently , and, naturally therefore, 
the permutations and combinat ions of the varieties make 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
1228 
 
up the infinite types that are available in the world; even 
within the biography of one and the same personality we 
find different moods and behaviours at different periods 
of time, depending entirely upon the occasion, the type of 
the situation, the nature of the problem and the kind of 
challenge the person is called upon to face.  
According to the Science of the gunas, as enunciated in 
Kapila's Saankhya Yoga, "Knowledge," "Action" and "Actor" 
are each classified under these three categories. They are 
being enumerated here and Krishna invites the students of 
the Geeta to 'LISTEN ATTENT IVELY TO THEM.' It is 
meaningless, in fact, to ask Arjuna to listen to the 
discourses, because he was all the time listening to the 
Lord. The implication must be that the teacher is attracting 
the special attention of the student because of the 
importance of the theme.  
HERE FOLLOWS THE THREE-FOLD TYPE OF 
"KNOWLEDGE":  
  
20. That by which one sees the one indestructible reality in all 
beings, undivided in the divide d, know that "knowledge" as 
SATTWIC (Pure) .  
Inasmuch as the constituents of action, namely 
"knowledge," "work," and the "ego," are under the 
influences of different moods, each one of them can fall 
into the three types. We fluctuate among these three gunas 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
1229 
 
and the different proportions in which they are mixed in 
our bosom determine the innumerable types of 
individuals that we are.  
These detailed descriptions of the different types of 
"knowledge," "action" and "actor" are given here not for 
the purpose of judging and cl assifying others, but for the 
seeker to UNDERSTAND HIMSELF. A true student of 
culture and self-development must try to maintain himself 
as far as possible, in the Sattwic temperament. By self-
analysis, we can diagnose ourselves, and immediately 
remedy the defects in us.  
In this stanza, we have the description of the Sattwic type 
of "knowledge." The "kno wledge" by which the One 
Imperishable Being is seen in all existence, is Sattwic. 
Though the forms constituted by the different body-mind-
intellect equipments are all different in different living 
creatures, the Sattwic "knowledge" recognises all of them 
as the expressions of one and the same Truth, which is the 
Essence in all of them.  
Just as an electrical engineer recognises the SAME 
electricity flowing through all the bulbs, a goldsmith 
recognises the ONE metal 'gold' in all ornaments, and 
every one of us is aware of the SAME cotton in all shirts, 
so also, the intellect that s ees the screen upon which the 
play of life and the throbs of existence are projected as the 
Changeless One has the "knowledge" that is Sattwic.  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
1230 
 
UNDIVIDED IN THE DIVIDED (Avibhaktam Vibhakteshu) -
-- Even if there are a hundred different pots, of different 
shapes and colour, and different  sizes, the "space" is the 
ONE undivided factor in all these different pots. Bulbs are 
different but the current that is expressing through them 
all is the ONE electricity. Waves are different, and yet the 
SAME ocean is the reality an d the substance in all the 
waves.... Similarly, the one LIFE  throbs in all, expressing 
itself differently as Its different manifestations, because of 
the different constitution in  the matter-arrangements. The 
"knowledge" that can recognise the play ( vilasa) of this 
One Principle of Consciousn ess in and through all the 
different equipments, is fully Sattwic.  
WHAT TYPE OF AN INTELLECT DOES THE 
"PASSIONATE" POSSESS?  
  
21. But that "knowledge" which sees in all beings various 
entities of distinct kinds, (and ) as different from one another, 
know that knowledge as RAJASIC (Passionate) .  
After having found a description of the 'good,' we have 
herein an equally complete description of the "knowledge" 
that is 'passionate' (Rajasic).  
The "knowledge" that recognises  plurality, by reason of 
separateness, is Rajasic in its texture. The "knowledge" of 
the 'passionate,' ever restle ss in its energy, considers 
various entities as different  from one another; to the 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
1231 
 
Rajasic "knowledge," the world is an assortment of 
innumerable types of different varieties; the intellect of 
such a man perceives distin ctions among the living 
creatures, and divides them into  different classes --- as the 
animal, the vegetable and the human kingdoms --- as men 
of different castes, creeds, races, nationalities etc.  
WHAT THEN IS THE NATURE OF "KNOWLEDGE" OF 
THE DULL?  
  
22. But that "knowledge, " which clings to one single effect, as if 
it were the whole, without reaso n, without foundation in truth 
and narrow, that is declared to be TAMASIC (Dull) .  
An intellect that has got fumed under the dulling effects of 
extreme tamas clings to one single "effect" as though it 
were the whole, never enquir ing into its "cause." The 
"knowledge" of the dull is pain ted here as that belonging 
to the lowest type of spiritual seekers. They are generally 
fanatic in their faith and in their devotion, in their views 
and values in life. They never enquire into, and try to 
discover, the cause of things and happenings; they are 
unreasonable (ahaitukam).  
Looking through such a confused intellect loaded with 
fixed ideas, the dull not only fail to see things as they are, 
but invariably project their own ideas upon the world and 
judge it all wrongly. In fact, a man of Tamasic intellect 
views the world as if it is meant for him and his pleasures 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
1232 
 
alone. He totally ignores the Divine Presence, the Infinite 
Consciousness. The "knowledge" of the dull is thus 
circumscribed by its own concept of self-importance, and 
thus its vision becomes narrow (alpam) and limited.  
To summarise, the "knowledge" of the 'good' ( Sattwic) 
perceives the oneness unde rlying the universe; the 
comprehension of the 'passionate' ( Rajasic) recognises the 
plurality of the world; and the understanding of the 'dull' 
(Tamasic) indicates a highly crystallized, self-centred ego 
in him, and his view of the world is always perverted and 
ever false.  
It must again be noted that in this chapter we shall come 
across similar three-fold divisions in the various aspects of 
our personal inner life and they are not meant to serve as 
reckoners to classify OTHERS, but they are meant to help 
us to SIZE OURSELVES UP from time to time.  
THE THREE-FOLD NATURE OF "ACTION" IS NOW 
DESCRIBED IN THE FOLLOWING STANZAS:  
  
23. An "action" which is or dained, which is free from 
attachment, which is done without love or hatred, by one who is 
not desirous of the fruit, that action is declared to be SATTWIC 
(pure) .  
Having so far explained the three types of "knowledge," 
Krishna now classifies "actions" ( Karma) under the same 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
1233 
 
three heads. A Sattwic "action" is the best, productive of 
peace within and harmony without the field of activity, 
and therefore, it is the purest of the three types of "action." 
It is an obligatory action ( Niyatam), a work that is 
undertaken for the work's own sake, in an attitude that 
work itself is worship. Such activities chasten the 
personality and are ever performed in a spirit of 
inspiration. Inspired activiti es naturally surpass the very 
excellence the actor or the doer  is ordinarily capable of. 
Such an activity is always undertaken without any 
attachment ( Sanga-rahitam) and without any anxiety for 
gaining any definite end. It is  a dedicated activity of love, 
and yet, it is not propelled by either love or hatred.  
The missionary work undertaken by all prophets and 
sages are examples in point. We too can recognise the 
same type of work, which we unconsciously perform on 
some rare occasions. A typical  example that can at this 
moment be remembered is an individual nursing his own 
wounded limb. As soon as, say, your left toe strikes 
against some furniture in the house and gets wounded, 
the entire body bends down to nurse it. Herein, there is 
neither any special love for the left leg nor any particular 
extra attachment for it, as compared with other parts of 
the body. To an individual th e whole body is himself, and 
all parts are equally important; he pervades his whole 
body.  
In the same fashion, an individual with a Sattwic intellect 
that has recognised the All-pervading One, lives in the 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
1234 
 
Consciousness of the One Reality that permeates the 
whole universe, and therefore, to him the leper and the 
prince, the sick and the health y, the rich and the poor are 
so many different parts of his own spiritual personality 
only. Such an individual serves the world in a sense of 
self-fulfilment and inspired joy.  
Summarising, a Sattwic Karma is a humane action, 
performed without any attachment, and not motivated 
either by likes ( Raga) or dislikes ( Dvesha), and undertaken 
without any desire to enjoy the results thereof. The 
"action" itself is its fulfilment; a Sattwic man acts, because 
to remain without doing service is a choking death to him. 
Such a man of Sattwic "action" alone is a true Brahmana.  
WHAT IS RAJASIC ACTION?  
  
24. But that "action" which is done by one, longing for desires, 
or gain, done with egoism, or with  much effort, is declared to be 
RAJASIC (Passionate) .  
The "action" of the 'passionate' ( Rajasic) is that which is 
undertaken to win one's de sires with an extremely 
insistent "I-act" mentality. Al ways such undertakings are 
works of heavy toil involving great strain, and all the 
consequent physical fatigue and mental exhaustion. The 
individual is impelled to  act and struggle by a well-
defined and extremely arrogant  ego-sense. He works, 
generally under tension and strain, since he comes to 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
1235 
 
believe that he alone can perform it and nobody else will 
ever help him. All the time he is exhausted with his own 
anxieties and fears at the thought whether his goal will 
ever be achieved, if at all. When an individual works thus 
with an arrogant ego, and with  all its self-centredness, he 
becomes restless enough to make himself totally 
exhausted and completely shattered. Such "actions" 
belong to the category of the passionate (Rajasic).  
All activities of political leaders, social workers, great 
industrialists, over-anxious parents, fanatic preachers, 
proselytising missionaries and blind money-makers, when 
they are at their best, are examples of this type.  
THE CHARACTERISTIC FEAT URES OF ACTIONS OF 
THE "DULL TYPE" ARE DESCRIBED HEREUNDER:  
  
25. That "action" which is undertaken from delusion, without 
regard for the consequence, loss, injury, and ability, is declared 
to be TAMASIC (dull) .  
The "actions" ( Karma) of the 'dull' type ( Tamasic) are 
performed without any consideration for the 
consequences thereof, without any regard for their loss of 
power or vitality. Such actors  never care for the loss or 
i n j u r y  c a u s e d  t o  o t h e r s  b y  t heir actions, nor do they pay 
any attention to their own status and ability, when they 
act. All such careless and irresponsible "actions" ( Karma s) 
undertaken merely because of some delusory 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
1236 
 
misconception of the goal, fall under the Tamasic type. 
Habits of drinking, reckless gambling, corruption, etc., are 
all examples of the dull (Tamasic) "actions."  
Such people have no regard for the consequences of their 
actions. Ere long, they lose their vitality, and injure all 
those who are depending upon them. They surrender 
their dignity and status, their capacities and subtle 
faculties --- all for the sake of their pursuit of a certain 
delusory goal in life. All they demand is a temporary joy 
of some sense gratification an d a tickling satisfaction of 
some fancy of the hour.  
"Actions" of this type ( Tamasic) immediately provide the 
performer with a substantial dividend of sorrow. Rajasic 
"action" comparatively takes a longer time to bring its 
quota of disappointments and sorrows, while Sattwic 
"action" is always steady and blissful.  
THE THREE KINDS OF 'DOERS' (ACTORS) ARE 
DESCRIBED IN THE FOLLOWING STANZA:  
  
26. An "agent" who is free fr om attachment, non-egoistic, 
endowed with firmness and enthusiasm, and unaffected by 
success or failure, is called SATTWIC (pure) .  
So far we have a description of the three types of 
"Knowledge" and "Action." The third of the constituents 
that goes into the make-up of an action is the "Doer," the 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
1237 
 
ego that has the desire to do. Since the three gunas come to 
influence the psychological life and the intellectual 
perception of all of us, the doer-personality in each one of 
us must also change it s moods and temperaments 
according to the preponderant guna that rules the bosom 
at any given moment of time. Consequently, the "ego" also 
is classified under three kind s. With this stanza starts the 
discussion on the three types of "actors" ( Kartaa) who act 
in the world outside.  
A Sattwic "Actor" is the one who is free from attachment to 
any of his kith and kin ( Mukta-sangah), and non-egoistic 
(Anaham vaadin). He is one who has no clinging 
attachment to the things and beings around, as he has no 
such false belief that the worl d outside will bring to him a 
desirable fulfilment of his existence. He sincerely feels that 
he has not done anything spectacular even when he has 
actually done the greatest good to mankind, because he 
surrenders his ego-centric individuality to the Lord, 
through his perfect attunement with the Infinite.  
When such an individual --- who has destroyed in himself 
his ego-sense and the consequent sense of attachment --- 
works in the worldly fields of activities, he ever acts with 
firm resolution ( Dhriti), and extreme zeal ( Utsaha). The 
term 'Dhriti' means "fortitude" --- the subtle faculty in man 
that makes him strive continuously towards a determined 
goal. When obstacles come his way, it is this faculty of 
'Dhriti' that discovers for him more and more courage and 
enthusiasm to face them all, and to continue striving 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
1238 
 
towards the same determined goal. This persevering 
tendency to push oneself on with the work until one 
reaches the halls of success, unmindful of the obstacles 
one might meet with on the path, is called ' Dhriti'; and 
'Utsaha' means untiring self-a pplication with dynamic 
enthusiasm on the path of achievement, while pursuing 
success.  
Lastly, a Sattwic "actor" is one who ever strives 
unperturbed, both in success and in failure, both in 
pleasure and in pain. At this moment I can only think of 
one example of this type of "actor" ( Kartaa): the nurse in 
the hospital. She has generally no attachment to the 
patient; she has no ego that she is curing the patient, 
because she knows that there is the ability of the doctor 
behind every successful cure. She has fortitude ( Dhriti) 
and enthusiasm ( Utsaha) --- or else she will not be able to 
continue efficiently in her job. And lastly, she is not 
concerned with success or fa ilure; she does not rejoice 
when a patient walks out fully  cured, nor does she moan 
for every patient that dies. She cannot afford such an 
indulgence. She understands the hospital to be an island 
of success and failure, of bi rths and deaths, and she is 
there only to serve.  
An "actor" (or agent) of the above type is one who suffers 
the least dissipation of his en ergies, and so he successfully 
manages to bring into the fiel d of his actions the mighty 
total possibilities of a fully unfolded human personality. 
The Sattwic "agent" strives joyously in Sattwic "actions," 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
1239 
 
guided by his Sattwic "knowledge"; his is the most 
enduring success, and the world of beings is benefited the 
most by the inexhaustible rewards of the love-labour of 
such prophets.  
A Sattwic Kartaa realises that in all his actions, his body, 
mind and intellect come into  play and serve the world 
only because the Spirit, the In finite, is in contact with 
them. The equipments of matter are as helpless as a 
broomstick left in a corner. Whenever the body functions, 
the mind-intellect-equipment throbs and heaves in its 
pursuit of the new ideals and achievements. And this is 
because of the Life which thrills  them into their respective 
expressions.  
The faculties of the intellect, the beauties of the heart, the 
vitality of the body, are all vehi cles for the Sacred Will of 
the Spirit to sing through. If the vehicles are not properly 
disciplined, and if they do not come to surrender totally to 
the Infinite, the Lord, they get broken and shattered.  
A Sattwic "doer" is one who is ever conscious of the touch 
of the Infinite Light in all his activities.  
WHO IS THE RAJASIC "DOER"?  
  
27. Passionate, desiring to gain the fruits-of-actions, greedy, 
harmful, impure, full of delight and grief, such an "agent" is 
said to be RAJASIC (passionate) .  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
1240 
 
A "doer" belonging to the PASSIONATE type is being 
exhaustively painted here. He is full of desires, passions 
and attachments, and he tenaciously clings on to some 
wished-for gain or goal. He is swayed by passion ( raaga) 
and eagerly seeks the fruit of his work. He is ever greedy 
(Lubdhah) in the sense that such a Rajasic " d o e r "  i s  n e v e r  
satisfied with what he gains and greedily thirsts for more. 
His thirst is insatiable beca use his desires multiply from 
moment to moment.  
When a man, full of desires and passions, works with 
mounting greed, he naturally  becomes very malignant 
(Himsaatmakah) in his programmes of pursuit. He never 
hesitates to injure another, if such injury were to win his 
end. He is blind to the amount of sorrow he might bring to 
others; he is concerned only with the realisation of his 
ulterior motives. When a man of this type (with the above 
qualities) becomes maliciously  resolved to gain his own 
ends, it is but natural that he becomes impure ( Ashuchih), 
meaning "immoral."  
Even unrighteous methods and vulgar immoralities are no 
ban to such a "doer" and he  will pursue them, if his 
particular desire can be fulfilled thereby. He may 
ordinarily be quite a moral and righteous man, but the 
beauty of his composure and the steadiness of his 
morality, expressed during his quieter moments, all fly 
away as brilliant splinters wh en the sledge hammer of his 
greed and passion, vengeful plans and malignant 
schemes, thuds upon his heart.  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
1241 
 
It is but natural that such a PASSIONATE "doer," when he 
acts in his blinding desires, comes to live, all through his 
embodied existence, a sad life of agitations, moved by joys 
and sorrows, "full of delight and grief," ( Harsha-Shoka-
Anvitah). This completes the picture of a man who is a 
'passionate' (Rajasic) "doer."  
AND HOW DOES A TAMASIC "DOER" FUNCTION IN 
THE FIELD OF ACTIVITY?  
  
28. Unsteady, vulgar, unbending, cheating, malicious, lazy, 
despondent, and procrastinating, such an "agent" is said to be 
TAMASIC (Dull) .  
Here we have a description of a Tamasic "doer" pursuing 
his work motivated by his Tamasic "knowledge" and 
expressing himself through his Tamasic "actions."  
UNCONTROLLED ( Ayuktah) --- A "doer" who has no 
control over himself, and therefore, is ever unsteady in his 
application, is of the Tamasic type. He becomes 
unbalanced in his activities, because his mind does not 
obey the warnings of his intellect. A yukta-mind is one 
which is obedient to and perfectly under the control of the 
intellect. A tamasic man is uncultured inasmuch as he acts 
in the world, spurred by the impulses and instincts of his 
own mind. The glory of a cultured man comes out only 
when he brings the impulsive storms of his mind under 
the chastening control and intelligent guidance of his 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
1242 
 
intellect. He is Ayuktah who behaves with no control over 
his own animal impulses and low instincts. When such an 
individual acts in the world, he cannot but behave as a 
vulgar man (Praakrita).  
If shown an intellectual mirror, he will never admit the 
reflected vulgarities as his own, nor will he acknowledge 
his way of living as base an d licentious. He is arrogant 
and obstinate (Stabdhah) and in his stubborn nature he will 
not lend himself to be persuaded to act more honourably.  
DISHONEST ( Shathah) --- He becomes dishonest. He 
becomes extremely deceitful. Herein the dishonesty, or 
deceitfulness, arises out of hi s incapacity to see any point-
of-view other than the false conclusions he has arrived at. 
Such an individual is not a dependable character, for he 
conceals his real motives and purposes and secretly works 
out his programmes which gene rally bring about a lot of 
sorrow to all around him.  
MALICIOUS ( Naishkritikah) --- The term describes, 
according to Shankara, one wh o is bent upon creating 
quarrels and disputes among people. With a vengefulness, 
such a person pursues his adversary to destroy him.  
INDOLENT (Alasah) --- The "dull doer" is a very indolent 
man spending his time in over-indulgence. He is an idler, 
for he avoids all creative endeavours and productive 
efforts, if by deceit or cunni ng, he can easily and readily 
procure enjoyable chances and pleasure-goods. He 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
1243 
 
pursues such a path, however immoral it may be. He is a 
social parasite; he enjoys and consumes without striving 
and producing. He puts forth no effort; drowsiness of 
intellect that renders him incapable of correct thinking is a 
typical feature. The three brothers, from Lanka, in fact, 
represent these three types of "doers." Of them, 
Kumbhakarna, who sleeps six months and wakes up only 
to spend the rest of the six months in eating, is symbolic of 
a Tamasic "doer."  
DESPONDENT (Vishaadi) --- He is one who will not meet 
the challenge of life squarely. He has neither the vitality 
nor the stamina to stand up ag ainst the challenges of life. 
This is because his over-indulgent nature has sapped up 
all his vitality and courage to meet life. Invariably, he 
spends his time complaining of men and things around 
him and wishes for a secure sp ot in the world, where he 
can be away from all obstacle s so that he may peacefully 
continue satisfying his endless thirst for sensuous 
enjoyments.  
PROCRASTINATER (Deergha-sootree) --- An individual so 
benumbed in his inner nature, slowly gathers within 
himself an incapacity to arrive at any firm judgement. 
Even if he comes to any vague decision, he has not the will 
to continue the consistent pursuit of his judgement. 
Indolent as he is by nature, more often than not, he 
postpones the right until it is too late. This procrastinating 
tendency is natural to a Tamasic "actor." The term deergha-
sootree has been interpreted by some commentators as 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
1244 
 
"harbouring deep and long ( deergha) vengeance against 
others ( sootra)," which is also not inappropriate in the 
context of the thought development in this stanza.  
Thus, one who is unsteady, vulgar, arrogant, deceitful, 
malicious, indolent, despondent and procrastinating, 
belongs to the 'dullest' type of "agents" available in the 
fields of human endeavour. This and the two preceding 
stanzas provide us with three beautifully framed mental 
pictures, bringing out in all details the Sattwic, the Rajasic 
and the Tamasic types of "doers" available in the world. As 
we have already emphasised these pictures are NOT 
yardsticks to classify OTHERS, but are meant for the 
seekers to observe themselves. Whenever a true seeker 
discovers symptoms of Tamas and Rajas growing in him 
he should take notice of th em at once and consciously 
strive to regain his Sattwic beauty.  
ACCORDING TO THE PREDOMINATING GUNA, 
"UNDERSTANDING" AND "F ORTITUDE" ALSO CAN 
FALL UNDER A THREE-FOLD CLASSIFICATION --- 
SAYS KRISHNA:  
  
29. Hear (you) the three-fold di vision of "understanding" and 
"fortitude" (made) according to th e qualities, as I declare them 
fully and severally, O Dhananjaya.  
'Work,' no doubt, is constituted of the three factors: the 
"knowledge," the "action" and the "actor." Each of these 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
1245 
 
three factors was shown to fall under a three-fold 
classification and all these classifications were described in 
the foregoing NINE STANZAS. When an actor, guided by 
his knowledge, acts in the world, no doubt, manifestation 
of work takes place. But underlying these three, are TWO 
FACTORS which supply the fuel and the motive force in 
all sustained endeavours. They are "understanding" 
(Buddhi) and "fortitude" (Dhriti).  
Buddhi, or "understanding," means "the intellectual 
capacity in the individual to  grasp what is happening 
around him." "Fortitude" ( Dhriti) is "the faculty of 
constantly keeping one idea in the mind and consistently 
working it out to its logical end"; consistency of purpose 
and self-application, without allowing oneself to be tossed 
about hither and thither like a dry leaf at the mercy of a 
fickle breeze, is called "fortitude."  
Every action is controlled and guided by our intellectual 
capacity of "understanding," and faithful consistency of 
purpose, "fortitude." This st anza is an introduction to a 
scientific discussion of these two faculties ( Buddhi and 
Dhriti) and their three-fold classification.  
WHAT IS SATTWIC UNDERSTANDING?  
  
30. That which knows the paths of work and renunciation, what 
ought to be done and what ou ght not to be done, fear and 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
1246 
 
fearlessness, bondage and liberation, that "understanding" is 
SATTWIC (pure) , O Partha.  
The intellect may be considered as having the best type of 
"understanding" if it can readily discriminate among 
beings and situations in its field of activity. The intellect 
has various functions --- observin g, analysing, classifying, 
willing, wishing, remembering and a host of others --- and 
yet, we find that the one facul ty essential in all of them is 
the "power of discrimination." Without 'discrimination,' 
neither observation nor classification, neither 
understanding nor judgemen t, is ever possible. 
Essentially, therefore, the function of the intellect is 
"discrimination," which is otherwise called the faculty of 
"right understanding."  
An "understanding" ( Buddhi) which is capable of clearly 
discriminating between the RI GHT field of pursuit and 
the WRONG field of false prop osition, is the highest type 
of "understanding." The individual must have the nerve to 
pursue the right path and also  the heroism to defect from 
all wrong fields of futile endeavour. In short, true 
"understanding" has a ready ability to discriminate 
between actions that are to be pursued ( Pravritti) and 
actions that are to be shunned (Nivritti).  
An intellect that can discriminate between the true and the 
f a l s e  t y p e s  o f  w o r k  m u s t  a l s o  b e  a b l e  t o  f u n c t i o n  i n  
judging correctly "WHAT IS RIGHT AND WHAT IS 
WRONG." Every moment, we are called upon to decide 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
1247 
 
what responses should be made  to the flux of happenings 
and challenges that continuously take place around us. A 
Sattwic Buddhi always helps us to arrive at the correct 
judgement. A person in a mood of anger or with a 
wounded vanity, suddenly resi gns his job only to regret 
thereafter, the folly of his action. His capacity to judge 
rightly was mutilated by his bad temper of the moment, or 
by his exaggerated vanity, and so he comes to regret. 
Arjuna himself had come to a state of mental hysteria 
when he complained that th is power of judgement had 
been lost, mainly because of his inordinate attachment to 
his kith and kin.  
WHAT IS TO BE FEARED AND WHAT IS NOT TO BE 
FEARED ( Bhaya-abhaya) --- "Fools rush in where angels 
fear to tread." Men of indiscrimination, in their false 
evaluation of the sense-world, hug on to delusory objects 
and things, fearing nothing from them, and yet, they fear 
to read and understand philosophy, to strive and to 
experience the Infinite. A true intellect must have the right 
"understanding" to discriminat e between what is to be 
feared and what is not to be feared.  
BONDAGE AND LIBERATION (Bandham-Moksham-cha) --
- If the "understanding" is clear, we can easily recognise 
the tendencies in our make-up that entangle the Higher in 
us, and curtail its fuller play. To observe and analyse 
ourselves with the required detachment, and to evaluate 
critically our psychological behaviours and intellectual 
attitudes in life is not easy; it is possible only for those 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
1248 
 
who are endowed with a well-cultivated Sattwic 
"understanding." If we cultivate Sattwic "understanding," 
it can not only diagnose for us the false values and wrong 
emotions that work in us, but also intuitively discover the 
processes of unwinding ourselves from these cruel 
vasanas, and help us to regain our personality-freedom 
from these subjective entanglements.  
To summarise: the Sattwic Buddhi is defined as one which 
makes known to us what type of work is to be done, and 
what type of work is to be renounced, which distinguishes 
the right from the wrong, which knows what is to be 
feared and what is to be faced fearlessly, which shows us 
the causes of our own present ugliness in life and explains 
to us the remedies for the same.  
Proper "understanding" can make a garden in a desert, 
can churn out pure success from every threat of failure. 
Without "understanding" and "fortitude," even the best of 
chances will become utter disa ster. Right "understanding" 
can convert the greatest of tragedies into chances for 
ushering in a prosperous destiny.  
WHAT IS RAJASIC UNDERSTANDING?  
  
31. That by which one wrongly understands DHARMA and 
ADHARMA and also what ought to be done and what ought 
not to be done, that intellect (understanding) , O Partha, is 
RAJASIC (passionate) .  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
1249 
 
The "understanding" of the passionate ( Rajasic) comes to 
judge the righteous ( Dharma) and the unrighteous 
(Adharma), what is to be done and what is not to be done, 
in a slightly perverted manner ( Ayathaavat). Such a Rajasic 
"understanding" cannot reach right judgements, because it 
is invariably coloured by its own preconceived notions 
and powerful likes and dislikes.  
WHAT IS TAMASIC "UNDERSTANDING"?  
  
32. That which, enveloped in darkness, sees ADHARMA as 
DHARMA, and all things perverted, that intellect 
(understanding) , O Partha, is TAMASIC (dull) .  
The type of "understanding" which brings sorrow to 
everyone including the indi v i d u a l  h i m s e l f ,  i s  t h e  
"understanding" of the 'dull' ( Tamasic). Actually it is no 
"understanding" at all; it ca n, at best, be called only a 
chronic bundle of misunderst andings. Such an intellect 
runs into its own conclusions, but unfortunately, it always 
lands up with wrong conclu sions only. It has such a 
totally perverted "understanding" that it recognises " A-
dharma" as " Dharma," the 'right' as 'wrong.' This faculty of 
coming to wrong judgements is amply seen in the dull, 
because their entire reasoning capacity is enveloped by 
complete darkness and egoistic drunkenness.  
DISCUSSING THE THREE TY PES OF "FORTITUDE," 
LORD KRISHNA CONTINUES:  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
1250 
 
  
33. The unwavering "fortitude" by which, through YOGA, the 
functions of the mind, the PRANA and the senses are 
restrained, that "fortitude, " O Partha, is SATTWIC (pure) .  
In this section of three stan zas we get a description of the 
three types of "fortitude" (Dhriti).  
Dhriti is that power within ourselves by which we 
constantly see the goal we want to achieve, and while 
striving towards it, Dhriti discovers for us the necessary 
constancy of purpose to pursue the path, in spite of all the 
mounting obstacles that rise on the way. Dhriti paints the 
idea, maintains it constantly in our vision, makes us 
steadily strive towards it, and when obstacles come, Dhriti 
mobilises secret powers with in us to face them all 
courageously, heroically, and steadily. We shall use the 
term "fortitude" to indicate all the above-mentioned 
suggestions implied in the term Dhriti.  
This secret fire in man that makes him glow in life and 
rockets him to spectacular achievements is not generally 
found in those who have no control over themselves and 
are voluptuously indulging in sensuous fields. A 
dissipated individual, who has drained off his energy 
through wrong-thinking and false-living, shall discover no 
Dhriti in himself. The subtle facu lty of "fortitude" is being 
analysed and classified here, under the three main heads: 
the 'good' ( Sattwic), the 'passionate' ( Rajasic) and the 'dull' 
(Tamasic). But in all of them, it is interesting to note, Dhriti 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
1251 
 
stands for "the constancy of purpose" with which every 
individual pursues his field of  endeavour chosen for him, 
with his own "understanding" (Buddhi).  
The constancy with which on e steadily controls one's 
mind and sense-organs and their activities, through 
single-pointed attention and fa ithful concentration upon a 
given point-of-contemplation, is the Dhriti of the Sattwic 
type.  
Mind alone can control the organs-of-action ( Karma-
Indriyas) and the organs-of-perception ( Jnana-Indriyas). To 
dissuade the organs-of-action and perception from their 
false pursuits of the ephemeral joys and the consequent 
dissipations, the mind must have some fixed source to 
draw its energies and satisf actions from. Without fixing 
the mind upon something no bler and higher, we cannot 
detach it from its present pursuits. Therefore, Krishna 
insists that Yoga is unavoidable.  
With faithful contemplation upon the Self, the mind gains 
in steadiness and equipoise, peace and satisfaction, and 
therefore, it develops a capacity to rule over the sense-
organs. But all these achievements are possible only when 
the inward personality can constantly supply a steady 
stream of Dhriti. Constancy in endeavour and consistency 
of purpose or "fortitude" that is expressed in any field of 
activity, becomes Sattwic Dhriti when constituted as 
described above.  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
1252 
 
WHAT IS RAJASIC 'Dhriti'?  
  
34. But the "fortitude, " O Arjuna , by which one holds fast to 
duty, pleasure and wealth, from attachment and craving for the 
fruits-of-actions, that "fortitude, " O Partha, is RAJASIC 
(passionate) .  
The constancy with which a person holds fast to duty 
(Dharma), wealth (Artha) and pleasure (Kama), encouraged 
by his growing desire to enjoy the fruit of each of them, is 
the steadiness or "fortitude" of the Rajasic type. It is 
interesting to note that in the enumeration Krishna avoids 
Moksha and only takes the first three of the "four ends of 
man" (Purushaartha), for, a Rajasic man is satisfied with the 
other fields of self-effort an d has no demand for spiritual 
liberation.  
The constancy of pursuit of su ch an individual will be in 
these three fields of duty, wealth and pleasure, and he will 
be pursuing one or the other of them with an extreme 
desire to enjoy the resultant satisfactions. He follows 
Dharma, only to gain the heavens; he pursues Artha so that 
he may have power in this life; and he pursues Kaama 
with a firm belief and faith that sensuous objects can give 
him all satisfactions in life.  
The steadiness with which one with such an 
"understanding" would strive an d work in these fields is 
classified as Rajasic Dhriti.  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
1253 
 
WHAT IS TAMASIC DHRITI?  
  
35. The 'constancy' because of which a stupid man does not 
abandon sleep, fear, grief, de pression, and also arrogance 
(conceit) , that "fortitude, " O Partha, is TAMASIC (dull) .  
In this stanza we have the description of the dull type of 
"fortitude," and it is not very difficult to understand it 
because a substantial majority of us belong to this type! 
The steadiness-of-purpose with which one DOES NOT 
give up one's dreams an d imaginations, fears and 
agitations, griefs and sorrows, depressions and arrogance, 
is the Dhriti of the Tamasic type.  
The term dream ( Swapna) is used here to indicate fancied 
imaginations thrown up by a mind that is ALMOST 
drowned in sleep. To see things which are not there but 
are delusorily projected by one's own fancy, is called a 
dream. The dull personalities project upon the world of 
objects a dream-like value of reality and false joy, and then 
laboriously strive to gain them.  
FEAR (Bhaya) --- Such men of delusion will have many a 
fancied fear of the future, which, of course, may never 
come to pass, but it can effi ciently destroy the equilibrium 
and balance, poise and peace in the individual's life. There 
are many among us who have experienced such fears by 
the hundred in the past. Some fear that they are going to 
die, but each following day a healthy man wakes up to 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
1254 
 
face the world! Psychologically, they are victims of a fear-
complex. And it is interesting to note with what great 
tenacity these men hug on to such complexes.  
GRIEF, DEPRESSION AND ARROGANCE ( Shokam, 
Vishaadam, Madam) --- These again are great channels 
through which human vitality gets dissipated. A man of 
extreme 'dullness' will constantly keep these three within 
his bosom and thereby suffer a sense of self-depletion and 
inner exhaustion. "Grief" ( Shokam) is, in general, the 
painful feeling of disappointm ent at something that has 
already happened in the PAST; while "depression" 
(Vishaadam) generally reaches our bosom as a result of our 
despair regarding the F UTURE; and "arrogance" ( Madam) 
is the sense of lusty conceit with which a foolish man lives 
his immoral, low life in the PRESENT.  
He who follows these five values of life is called by 
Krishna a fool (Durmedhaa), and the constancy with which 
such a fool follows his life of dreams and fears, griefs and 
despondencies, arrogance and passion, is indicated as the 
Dhriti of the Tamasic type.  
"PLEASURE" ALSO IS THREE-FOLD ACCORDING TO 
THE PREDOMINANT "GUNA" IN THE INDIVIDUAL; 
HERE FOLLOWS THE THREE-FOLD DIVISION OF 
"PLEASURE," WHICH IS THE EFFECT OF "ACTION":  
  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
1255 
 
36. And now hear from me, O best  among the Bharatas, of the 
three-fold "pleasure, " in whic h one rejoices by practice, and 
surely comes to the end-of-pain.  
In the logical thought development in this chapter, 
hitherto we found the three factors that constitute the 
"impulse of all actions": (1) the knowledge, (2) the actor 
and (3) the action. Afterwards, the very motive forces in 
all activity --- which not only propel activity, but 
intelligently control and direct it --- the Buddhi and the 
Dhriti, have also been shown severally, in their different 
types.  
Every "actor" acts in his field,  guided by his "knowledge," 
ruled by his "understanding" ( Buddhi), and maintained by 
his "fortitude" ( Dhriti). The dissection and observation of 
"work" is now complete since we have understood the 
"anatomy and physiology" of work. The "Psychology" of 
work is now being discussed: why does man act? In fact, 
every living creature acts propelled by the same instinct, 
namely, the craving for happiness.  
With the three constituents of action --- namely, 
"knowledge," "agency" and "act ion" --- helped by the right 
type of "understanding" ( Buddhi) and "fortitude" ( Dhriti), 
every living creature from the womb to the tomb 
continues acting in the world. To what purpose? Everyone 
acts for the same goal of gaining happiness, meaning, a 
better sense of fulfilment.  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
1256 
 
And though the goal be thus one and the same (viz., 
happiness), since different types of constituents go into 
the make-up of our actions, and since we are so different 
in the texture of our UNDERSTANDING and 
FORTITUDE, the path adopted by each one of us is 
distinctly different from thos e adopted by all others. In 
and through the variety of actions in the universe, all 
people --- the good, the passionate, and the dull --- seek 
their own sense of satisfaction.  
Since each of the five component parts that make up an 
"action" is of the three different types, it follows that 
"happiness" that is gained by the different types must also 
be different in its texture, perfection and completeness. 
Here follows a description of the three types of 
"happiness."  
THROUGH PRACTICE ( Abhyaasat) --- Through a 
familiarity of this complete scheme-of-things within, an 
individual can, to a large extent, come to diagnose himself 
and understand the why and the wherefore of all his 
miseries. He can thus learn to readjust and re-evaluate his 
life and thereby come to end his sorrows totally, or at 
least, alleviate them to some extent.  
WHAT IS SATTWIC (PURE) "HAPPINESS"?  
  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
1257 
 
37. That which is like poison at first, but in the end like nectar, 
that "pleasure" is declared to be SATTWIC (pure) , born of the 
purity of one's own mind, due to Self realisation.  
That "happiness" which, in the beginning, is like poison 
and very painful, but which, when it works itself out, 
fulfils itself in a nectarine success, is the enduring 
"happiness" of the 'good' ( Sattwic). In short, "happiness" 
that arises from constant effort is the "happiness" that can 
yield us a greater beauty and a larger sense of fulfilment. 
The flimsy "happiness" that is gained through sense-
indulgence and sense-gratification is a joy that is fleeting, 
and after its onslaught there is a terrific under-current that 
comes to upset our equilibrium and drag us into the 
depths of despondency.  
The joy arising out of inner self-control and the 
consequent sense of self-perfection is no cheap 
gratification. In the beginning its practice is certainly very 
painful and extremely arduous. But one who has 
discovered in oneself the necessary courage and heroism 
to walk the precipitous "path" of self-purification and 
inward balance, comes to enjoy the subtlest of happiness 
and the all-fulfilling sense of inward peace. This 
"happiness" (Sukham), arising out of self-control and self-
discipline, is classified  here by the Lord as Sattwic 
"happiness."  
BORN OUT OF THE PURITY OF ONE'S OWN MIND 
(Atma Buddhi Prasaada-jam) --- By carefully living the life of 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
1258 
 
the 'good' ( Sattwic) and acting in disciplined self-control, 
as far as possible in th e world, maintaining the Sattwic 
qualities in all their "component parts," one can develop 
the ' Prasaada' of one's inner nature. The term ' Prasaada' is 
very often misunderstood in ritualistic language.  
The peace and tranquillity, the joy and expansion, that the 
mind and intellect come to experience as a result of their 
discipline and contemplation are the true " Prasaada." The 
joy arising out of spiritual practices, provided by the 
integration of the inner nature, is called ' Prasada' which is 
the Sattwic "happiness," Prasaada-jam. In short, the sense of 
fulfilment and the gladness of heart that well up in the 
bosom of a cultured man, as a result of his balanced and 
self-disciplined life of high ideals and divine values of life, 
are the enduring "happiness" of all Men-of-Perfection, of 
all true men of religion.  
WHAT IS RAJASIC (PASSIONATE) "HAPPINESS"?  
  
38. That pleasure which arises fr om the contact of the sense-
organs with the objects, (which is) at first like nectar, (but is) in 
the end like poison, that  is declared to be RAJASIC (passionate) 
.  
That happiness which arise s in our bosom when the 
appropriate world-of-objects comes in contact with our 
sense-organs is indeed a thri ll that is nectarine in the 
beginning, but unfortunately, it  vanishes as quickly as it 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
1259 
 
comes, dumping the enjoyer into a pit of exhaustion and 
indeed into a sense of ill-reputed dissipation.  
Rajasic "happiness" arises only when the sense-organs are 
actually in contact with the sense-objects. Unfortunately, 
this contact cannot be permanently established; for the 
objects are always variable. And the subjective mind and 
intellect, the instruments that come in contact with the 
objects, are also variable and changing. The sense-organs 
cannot afford to embrace the sense-objects at all times 
with the same appetite, and even if they do so, the very 
object in the embrace of th e sense-organs withers and 
putrefies, raising the stink of death. No man can FULLY 
enjoy even the passing glitter of joy that the sense-organs 
give him, for even at the moment of enjoyment the joy-
possibility in it gets unfortun ately tainted by an anxiety 
that it may leave him. Thus, to a true thinker, the 
temporary joys of sense-objects are not at all satisfactory, 
since they bury the enjoyer, ere long, in a tomb of sorrow.  
This sort of "happiness" is classified as the Rajasic type of 
"happiness" and is generally pursued by men of passion.  
WHAT IS TAMASIC (DULL) "HAPPINESS"?  
  
39. The pleasure, which at first and in the sequel deludes the 
Self, arising from sleep, indolenc e and heedlessness, is declared 
to be TAMASIC (Dull) .  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
1260 
 
The "happiness" of the 'dull' ( Tamasic) is that which 
deludes the Higher in us, and vitiates the culture in us; 
and, when the pursuit of such "happiness" is continued for 
a length of time, it gives to the intellect a thick crust of 
wrong values and false ideals, and ruins the spiritual 
sensitivity of the personality.  
This type of Tamasic "happiness" satisfies mere sense-
cravings; for such Tamasic "happiness" arises, according to 
the Lord, from sleep ( Nidraa), indolence ( Aalasya) and 
heedlessness (Pramaada).  
SLEEP (Nidraa) --- It is not the psychological condition of 
the everyday sleep that is meant here. Philosophically, the 
term "sleep" stands for "the non-apprehension of Reality," 
and the incapacity of the dull-witted to perceive any 
permanent, ever-existing goal of life. This encourages one 
to seek simple sense-gratifications at the flesh level.  
INDOLENCE ( Aalasya) --- It is the incapacity of the 
intellect to think out correctly the problems that face it and 
come to correct judgement. Such  an inertia of the intellect 
makes it insensitive to the in spiring song of life, and a 
person having such an intellect is generally tossed here 
and there by the passing tides of his own instincts and 
impulses.  
HEEDLESSNESS ( Pramaada) --- As every challenge 
reaches us and demands our resp onse to it, no doubt, the 
Higher in us truly guides our activities; but the lower, 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
1261 
 
indolent mind seeks a comp romise and tries to act, 
heedless of the voice of the Higher. When an individual 
has thus lived for some time carelessly ignoring the Voice 
of the Higher, he becomes mo re and more removed from 
his divine perfections. He sinks lower and lower into his 
animal nature.  
When such an individual, wh o is heedless of the higher 
calls, indolent at his intellectual level and completely 
asleep to the existence and the play of Reality, seeks 
"happiness," he only seeks a "happiness" that deludes the 
soul, both at the beginning  and at the end. Such 
"happiness" is here classifi ed by Krishna as "dull" 
(Tamasic).  
HERE FOLLOWS A STANZA WHICH CONCLUDES 
THE SUBJECT OF OUR PRESENT DISCUSSION:  
  
40. There is no being on earth, or again in heaven among the 
"DEVAS" (heavenly beings) , who is totally liberated from the 
three qualities, born of PRAKRITI (matter) .  
With the above stanza the exha ustive description of the 
three Gunas as impinging upon the personality of all 
living organisms, is concluded. On the whole, this section 
of the chapter has given us a psychological explanation for 
the variety of men that we meet with, in the world-of-
plurality, not only in their personality-structures but also 
in their individual-behaviours.  The three types of beings 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
1262 
 
have been described exhausti vely --- by an analysis of 
"knowledge," "action," "agent," "understanding" and 
"fortitude." This is only for our guidance so that we know 
where we stand in our own inner nature and outer 
manifestations.  
If we detect, with the abov e-mentioned slide-rule of 
personality, that we belong to the Tamasic or the Rajasic 
types, we, as seekers of cult ural expression and growth, 
are to take warning and strive to heave ourselves into the 
Sattwic state. Remember, and I repeat, REMEMBER, these 
classifications are given NOT  TO CLASSIFY OTHERS but 
to provide us with a ready-reckoner to help us in our 
constant and daily self-analysis and self-discipline.  
These three gunas have been described because there is no 
living organism in the world, "NO CREATURE EITHER 
ON EARTH OR AGAIN AMONG THE GODS IN 
HEAVEN," who is totally free from the influence of these 
three gunas; no living creature can act or work beyond the 
frontiers provided by these three gunas. Nature ( Prakriti) 
itself is constituted of these gunas; the play of these three 
gunas is the very expression of Prakriti.  
But at the same time, no two creatures react to the world 
outside in the same fashion, because the proportion in 
which these three gunas come to influence each one is 
different at different times. These three gunas put together 
are the manifestation of " Maya." Individuals differ from 
one another because of the different textures of the gunas 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
1263 
 
that predominantly rule over them; it is this Maya that 
gives them their individuality. An individual cannot, at 
any time, exist without all these three gunas, whatever be 
their relative proportion.  
No sample of "coffee" is possible without its three 
ingredients, the decoction, the milk, and the sugar; but at 
the same time, the proportion in which they are mixed 
together may be different from cup to cup according to the 
taste of the partaker. He who has transcended the three 
gunas comes to experience the very plurality in the world 
as the play of the One Infini te. So, let us introspect and 
evaluate ourselves every day, every minute. Let us avoid 
the lower gunas and steadily work ourselves up towards 
the achievement of the Sattwic state. Only after reaching 
the status of the good ( Sattwic) can we be ushered into the 
State of Godhood --- Perfection Absolute.  
With these three measuring rods --- the qualities ( gunas) 
Krishna classifies the entire community of man under 
three distinct types. The criterio n of this classification is 
the texture of man's inner eq uipments which he brings 
into play for his achievements in his fields of activity. 
Accordingly, the Hindu scriptures have brought the entire 
humanity under a four-fold  classification. So, its 
applicability is not merely co nfined to India --- BUT IS 
UNIVERSAL.  
Certain well-defined characteristics determine the types of 
these four classes of human beings; they are not always 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
1264 
 
determined by heredity, or accident of birth. They are 
termed, in our society, as: the Brahmanas --- with a major 
portion of Sattwa, a little Rajas and with minimum Tamas; 
the Kshatriyas --- mostly Rajas with some Sattwa, and a 
dash of Tamas; the Vaishyas --- with more Rajas, less Sattwa 
and some Tamas; and the Shudras --- mostly Tamas, a little 
Rajas, with only a suspicion of Sattwa.  
This four-fold classification is universal and for all times. 
Even today it holds good. In  modern language, the four 
types of people may be called: (1) the creative thinkers; (2) 
the politicians; (3) the commerc ial employers; and (4) the 
labourers (the proletarians). We can easily recognise how 
each subsequent classification holds in awe and reverence 
the previous higher class --- the employees are afraid of 
the employer, the commercial men are suspicious of the 
politicians and the politicians  tremble at the courageous, 
independent thinkers.  
In the following stanzas, by  the discussions contained in 
them, in the immediate cont ext of the Krishna-Arjuna 
summit talks, the Lord is only trying to make Arjuna 
understand that his inner equipment is such that he can be 
classified only as a Kshatriya. Being a Kshatriya, his duty is 
to fight, championing the ca use of the good, and thus 
establish righteousness. He cannot, with profit, retire to 
the jungle and meditate for self-unfoldment, since he will 
have to grow, first of all, into the status of the Sattwic 
personality (Brahmana) before he can successfully strive on 
the path of total retirement and a life of rewarding 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
1265 
 
contemplation. Therefore, with the available texture of 
mind and intellect, the only spiritual Sadhana left for 
Arjuna is to act vigorously in the field of contention. 
Thereby he can exhaust his existing vasanas of Rajas and 
Tamas.  
IN THE FOLLOWING VERSES THE DUTIES ORDAINED 
BY ONE'S NATURE, " SWABHAAVA," AND ONE'S 
STATION IN LIFE, " SWADHARMA," ARE LAID OUT 
WITH THE THOROUGHNESS OF A LAW BOOK:  
  
41. Of scholars (BRAHMANAS) , of leaders (KSHATRIYAS) 
and of traders (VAISHYAS) , as also of workers (SHUDRAS) , 
O Parantapa, the duties are di stributed according to the 
qualities born of their own nature.  
After dealing with the various gunas in the preceding 
stanza, Krishna now applies them to the social fabric of 
humanity and thus intelligently classifies the entire 
mankind under four distinct heads: the Brahmanas, the 
Kshatriyas, the Vaishyas and the Shudras.  
Different types of duties are assigned to each of these 
classes of individuals depe nding upon their nature 
(Swabhaava), which is ordered by the proportion of the 
gunas in the make-up of each type of inner equipment. The 
duties prescribed for a particular type depend upon the 
manifestation of the inner ruling gunas, as expressed in the 
individual's contact with the world and his activities in 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
1266 
 
society. The good and bad are not diagnosed by merely 
examining the texture of the pers on's skin or the colour of 
his hair; an individual is judged only by his expressions in 
life and by the quality of his contacts with the world 
outside. These alone can reflect one's inner personality --- 
the quality and texture of the contents of one's mind-
intellect.  
After testing and determining the quality of the inner 
personality, the individuals in the community are 
classified, and different types of duties are prescribed for 
each. Naturally, the duties prescribed for a Brahmana are 
different from those expected of a Kshatriya; and the work 
of the Vaishya and the Shudra should necessarily be 
different from that of the Brahmana and the Kshatriya. The 
Shastra enjoins duties, by pursuing which the 
preponderant Tamas can be evolved into Rajas, which, in 
its turn, can grow to become Sattwa. And, even then, the 
seeker must wait for the sublimation of Sattwa, when 
alone the final experience of the Infinite is gained.  
By observing a person one can conclude as to which class 
he belongs to --- whether to the Brahmana, the Kshatriya, 
the Vaishya or the Shudra. In this context, when we say a 
man is Sattwic, it only means that the Sattwic qualities are 
predominant in him; even in the most Sattwic of persons, 
at times, the Rajasic and the Tamasic qualities can and will 
show up; so too, even in the most Tamasic man, Sattwa and 
Rajas will necessarily show up sometimes. No one is 
exclusively of one guna alone.  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
1267 
 
Today, as they are now worked out in India, these four 
classifications have lost mu ch of their meaning. They 
signify merely a hereditary birth-right in the society, a 
mere physical distinction that divides the society into 
castes and sub-castes. A true Brahmana is necessarily a 
highly cultured Sattwic man who can readily control his 
sense-organs, and with perfect mastery over his mind, can 
raise himself, through contempl ation, to the highest peaks 
of meditation upon the Infinite. But today's Brahmana is 
one who is claiming his dist inction by birth alone and 
alas! he gets no reverence, because he has not striven to 
deserve it.  
ANSWERING THE FOUR TYPES OF NATURE, AS 
DETERMINED BY THEIR PSYCHOLOGICAL 
CHARACTERISTICS, THERE ARE FOUR KINDS OF 
SOCIAL LIVING, EACH HAVING A DEFINITE 
FUNCTION IN SOCIETY: THEY ARE DESCRIBED 
BELOW:  
  
42. Serenity, self-restraint, aust erity, purity, forgiveness and 
also uprightness, knowledge, realisation, belief-in-God --- are the 
duties of the BRAHMANAS, born of (their own) nature.  
Herein we have a detailed enumeration of the duties of a 
Brahmana born out of his own predominantly Sattwic 
nature. Serenity ( Shama), is one of his duties. Shama is 
controlling the mind from running into the world-of-
objects seeking sense-enjoymen ts. Even if we shut off the 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
1268 
 
world-of-objects by carrying ourselves away from the 
tumults and temptations of life into a quiet, lonely place, 
even there our minds will stride  forth into the sense-fields 
through the memories of our pa st indulgences. To control 
consciously this instinctive fl ow of the mind towards the 
sense-objects is called Shama.  
SELF-CONTROL (Dama) --- Controlling the sense-organs, 
which are the gateways throug h which the external world 
of stimuli infiltrates into our mental domain and mars our 
peace, is called Dama. A man practising Dama, even if he 
b e  i n  t h e  m i d s t  o f  s e n s u o u s  o b j e c t s ,  i s  n o t  d i s t u r b e d  b y  
them. A true Brahmana is one who practises constantly 
both Shama and Dama, serenity and self-control.  
AUSTERITY ( Tapas) --- Conscious physic al self-denial in 
order to economise the expenditure of human energy so 
lavishly spent in the wrong channels of sense-indulgence, 
and conserving it for reaching the higher unfoldment 
within is called Tapas. By the practice of Shama and Dama, 
the Brahmana will be steadily controlling both the mad 
rush of his senses and his mind-wandering. This helps 
him to conserve his inner vitality which would have been 
otherwise spent in hunting after sense-joys. This 
conserved energy is utilised for higher flights in 
meditation. This subjective process of economising, 
conserving, and redirecting one' s energies within is called 
Tapas. It is a Brahmana's duty to live in Tapas.  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
1269 
 
PURITY ( Shaucham) --- The Sanskrit term used here 
includes external cleanliness and internal purity. Habits of 
cleanliness in one's personal life and surroundings are the 
governing conditions in the life of one who is practising 
both Shama and Dama. The practice of Tapas makes him 
such a disciplined person that he cannot stand any 
disorderly confusion or state of neglect around and about 
him. A person living in the mi dst of things thrown about 
in a disorderly manner is certainly a man of slothful 
nature and slovenly habits. It is the duty of the Brahmana 
to keep himself ever clean and pure.  
FORBEARANCE (Kshaanti) --- To be patient and forgiving 
and thus to live without struggling even against wrongs 
done against one, is "forbearance" --- the duty of a 
Brahmana. Such an individual will never harbour any 
hatred for anyone; he lives equanimously amidst both the 
good and the bad.  
UPRIGHTNESS ( Aarjavam) --- This is a quality which 
makes an individual straightf orward in all his dealings, 
and his uprightness makes him fearless in life. He is afraid 
of none, and he makes no compromise of the higher calls 
with the lower murmurings.  
Cultivating the above six qualities --- serenity ( Shama), 
self-control ( Dama), austerity ( Tapas), purity ( Shaucham), 
forbearance ( Kshaanti), and straightforwardness 
(Aarjavam) --- and expressing them in all his relationships 
with the world outside is the life-long duty of a Brahmana. 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
1270 
 
The above-mentioned six artistic strokes complete the 
picture of a Brahmana on the stage of the world when he 
deals with things and beings in the various situations in 
life. The Lord enumerates, in the stanza, three more duties 
of a Brahmana which are the rules of conduct controlling 
his spiritual life.  
KNOWLEDGE (Jnaanam) --- The theoretical knowledge of 
the world, of the struct ure of the equipments-of-
experience and their behaviou r while coming in contact 
with the outer world, of the highest goal of life, of the 
nature of the spirit --- in shor t, knowledge of all that the 
Upanishads deal with --- is included in the term Jnaanam.  
WISDOM ( Vijnaanam) --- If 'theoretical knowledge' is 
Jnaanam then 'personal experience' is Vijnaanam. 
Knowledge digested and assimilated brings home to man 
an inward experience, and thereafter, he comes to live his 
life guided by this deep inner experience called "wisdom." 
Knowledge can be imparted, but "wisdom" is to be found 
by the individual in himself.  When a student discovers in 
himself the enthusiasm to live the knowledge gained 
through his studies, then fr om the field of his lived 
experience arises "wisdom" --- Vijnaanam.  
FAITH (Aastikyam) --- Unless one has a deep faith in what 
one has studied and lived, th e living itself will not be 
enthusiastic and full. This ard ency of conviction which is 
the motive-force behind one who lives what he has 
understood, is the secret sustaining power that steadily 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
1271 
 
converts KNOWLEDGE into "wisdom." This inner order, 
this intellectual honesty, this subtle unflagging 
enthusiasm, is called "FAITH."  
To grow and steadily cultivate knowledge, wisdom and 
faith are the sacred duties of a Brahmana in his spiritual 
life.  
WHAT ARE THE DUTIES OF A 'KSHATRIYA?'  
  
43. Prowess, splendour, firmness, dexterity, and also not fleeing 
from battle, generosity, lordlines s --- these are the duties of the 
KSHATRIYAS, born of (their own) nature.  
The Kshatriyas have a greater dose of Rajoguna in the 
composition of their personality. A Kshatriya is not defined 
by Lord Krishna as the lawful son of another Kshatriya. He 
enumerates a series of qualit ies and behaviours noticed in 
a truly Kshatriya personality. In the Geeta, the four "castes" 
are described in terms of their manifested individuality 
when coming in contact with the world-of-objects --- the 
field of expression. In all th ese descriptions we meet with 
details of the individual's mental and intellectual reactions 
to his moral life.  
PROWESS AND BOLDNESS ( Shauryam and Tejah) --- 
These mean the vigour and constancy with which he 
meets the challenges in his life. He who has the above two 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
1272 
 
qualities, heroism and vigour of pursuit, certainly 
becomes a commanding personality.  
FORTITUDE ( Dhriti) --- This is already explained in 
earlier stanzas. Herein, as applied to a Kshatriya, it is the 
powerful will of the personality, who, having decided to 
do something, pursues the "path" and discovers in himself 
the necessary drive and constancy of purpose to meet, and 
if necessary, break down all the obstacles until he gains 
victory or success.  
PROMPTITUDE ( Daakshyam) --- The Sanskrit equivalent 
for the army parade-ground command "Attention" is 
"Daksha!" This quality of alertness and smart vigilance is, 
indeed, Daakshyam. In the context here, it means that a 
Kshatriya is prompt in coming to decisions and in 
executing them. Such an individual is industrious and has 
an enviable amount of pe rseverance, however hazardous 
may the field of his activity be.  
NOT FLEEING FROM BATTLE --- One who has all the 
above qualities can never readily accept defeat in any field 
of conflict. He will not leave any work incomplete. Since 
Krishna is here generally classifying all human beings 
according to the gunas predominant in them, these terms 
should be understood in their greatest amplitude of 
suggestion. No doubt, a true warrior should not step back 
in any field of battle; but such literal interpretation is only 
incomplete. The field-of-battle should include all fields of 
competition wherein things and situations arrange 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
1273 
 
themselves in opposition to the planned schemes of a man 
of will and dash. In no su ch condition will a true Kshatriya 
feel nervous. He never leaves a field which he has entered; 
if at all he leaves, he leaves with the crown of success!  
GENEROSITY (Daanam) --- Governments or kings cannot 
be popular unless they loosen their purse-strings. Even in 
modern days every government  budget in all democratic 
countries has amounts allocated under heads which are 
not discussed and voted. A man of action cannot afford to 
be miserly since his success will depend upon his 
influence on a large number of friends and supporters. 
The glory of a prince is in his compassion for others who 
are in need of help.  
LORDLINESS (Ishwara-bhaava) --- As a rule, without self-
confidence in one's own abilities one cannot lead others. A 
leader must have such a firm faith in himself that he will 
be able to reinforce other f rail hearts around him with his 
self-confidence. Thus, lordlin ess is one of the essential 
traits in a Kshatriya. He must waft all around a fragrance 
of brilliance and dynamism, electrifying the atmosphere 
around him. A king is not made by his golden robes or be-
jewelled crown. The crown, the robe and the throne have a 
knack of electing for themselv es a true wearer. Lordliness 
is the hallmark of Kshatriya.  
These eight qualities --- brav ery, vigour, constancy, 
resourcefulness, promptitude, courage in the face of the 
enemy, generosity and lordliness --- are enumerated here 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
1274 
 
as the duties of a Kshatriya, meaning that it is the duty of a 
true man-of-action to cultivate, to maintain and to express 
these traits in himself. In no society can leaders of men 
and affairs claim to be at once the spiritual leaders of the 
people. Secular heads cannot be spiritual guides. But a 
true leader is one who has th e subtle ability to incorporate 
the spiritual ideals of our culture into the work-a-day life 
and maintain them in the community in all its 
innumerable fields of activity.  
THE DUTIES OF THE VAISHYAS AND SHUDRAS ARE 
DESCRIBED IN THE FOLLOWING:  
  
44. Agriculture, cattle-rearing an d trade are the duties of the 
VAISHYAS, born of (their own) nature; and service is the duty 
of the SHUDRAS, born of (their own) nature.  
Since each mind-intellect equipment is governed and 
ruled over by its predominating quality ( guna), each 
equipment has its own nature to reckon with. A vehicle 
that can efficiently work in one medium of transport 
cannot with the same efficien cy work in another medium, 
a car is efficient on the ro ad --- but on water? The Rajasic 
mind cannot fly into meditati on and maintain its poise as 
easily and as beautifully as the Sattwic mind can. 
Similarly, in the field in which a Kshatriya can outshine 
everybody, a Vaishya or a Shudra cannot. To rise to the 
highest station in social life all men cannot have 
IDENTICAL opportunities. A social system can only give 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
1275 
 
"equal opportunities" for all its members to develop their 
gifts in and through life. In order to prove this thesis, the 
various duties are prescribed that will help to mould the 
personalities of the different types of men.  
AGRICULTURE, BREEDING AND TENDING CATTLE, 
TRADE AND COMMERCE --- These are three fields in 
which a Vaishya can function inspiredly and exhaust his 
imperfections. These are duti es towards which he has an 
aptitude because of his own nature. Work in a spirit of 
DEDICATION AND SERVICE IS THE DUTY OF A 
SHUDRA.  
The mental temperament of a man determines what class 
he belongs to and each class has been given particular 
duties to perform in the world. If a man who is fit 
temperamentally for one type of work is entrusted with a 
different type of activity, he will bring chaos not only into 
the field but also in himself. For example, if a Kshatriya 
were asked to fan someone in a spirit of service, he may 
condescend to do so, but one will find him ordering 
somebody else, almost instinctively, to fetch a fan for him! 
So too, if a man of commercial temperament, a Vaishya, 
comes to serve as a temple-p riest, the sacred place will 
become, ere long, worse than a trading centre; and again, 
let him become the head of any government, he will, out 
of sheer instinct, begin doing profitable "business" from 
the seat of governmental authority; people call it 
corruption!!  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
1276 
 
We must analyse and discover the type of vasanas and 
temperaments that predominate in each one of us and 
determine what types of men we are. None belonging to 
the higher groups has any justification to look down with 
contempt upon others who are of the lower types. Each 
one serves the society as best  as he can. Each one must 
work in a spirit of dedicati on for his own evolution and 
sense of fulfilment. When ea ch one works thus according 
to his vasanas and fully devotes his attention to his 
prescribed duties, it is said here that he will develop 
within himself and attain, in stages, the ultimate 
Perfection.  
When a person works devotedl y, in the proper field and 
in the environment best suited to him, he will be 
exhausting the existing vasanas in him. And when the 
vasanas are reduced he will experience tranquillity and 
peace within and it will become possible for him to 
discover more and more concentration and single-pointed 
contemplation.  
WITH THESE FACULTIES IN HIM MAN CAN 
ULTIMATELY REACH THE STATE OF PERFECTION --- 
THE LIFE IN THE SELF --- HOW?  
  
45. Devoted, each to his own duty, man attains Perfection. How, 
engaged in his own duty, he attains Perfection, listen.  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
1277 
 
EACH DEVOTED TO HIS DUTY, MAN ATTAINS 
PERFECTION --- By being loyal to our own level of 
feelings and ideas, to our own development of 
consciousness, we can evolve into higher states of self-
unfoldment.  
The truth of this classification of mankind may not be very 
obvious, if we observe it only superficially. But the 
biographies of all great men of  action declare repeatedly 
the precision with which this law-of-life works itself out in 
human affairs. A tiny Corsican boy who was asked to tend 
sheep refused to do so and reached Paris to become one of 
the greatest generals the world had ever seen --- 
Napoleon. A Goldsmith or a Keats would rather compose 
his metres in a garret than take up a commercial job, 
courting prosperity and a life of comfort. Each one is 
ordered by his own Swabhaava, and each can discover his 
fulfilment only in that self-ordered field of activity.  
By thus working in the field ordered by one's own vasanas, 
if one can live surrendering one's ego and ego-centric 
desires to enjoy the fruits, one can achieve a sense of 
fulfilment; and a great peace will arise out of the 
exhaustion of one's vasanas. The renunciation of the ego 
and its desires can never be accomplished unless there is a 
spirit of dedication and a total surrender to the Infinite. 
When unbroken awareness of the Lord becomes a 
constant habit of the mind, de dication becomes effective, 
and man's evolution starts.  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
1278 
 
Such an intelligent classification of human beings on the 
basis of their physical behaviour, psychological structure 
and intellectual aptitude is applicable not in India only. 
This four-fold classification is universal, both in its 
application in life and its implication in the cultural 
development of man.  
HOW CAN ONE, DEVOTED TO ONES OWN DUTY, 
ATTAIN PERFECTION? "THAT DO THOU HEAR," 
SAYS LORD KRISHNA:  
  
46. From Whom is the evolution of  all beings, by Whom all this 
is pervaded, worshipping Him with one's own duty, man 
attains Perfection.  
In this chapter the four-fold classification of men and the 
duties of the individuals belonging to each classification 
are given. When a man acts according to his "nature" 
(Swabhaava) and station-in-life (Swadharma), his vasanas get 
exhausted. This exhaustion of the load of vasanas and the 
consequent sense of joy and relief can be gained only 
when he learns to work and achieve in a spirit of total self-
surrender.  
By constantly remembering the higher goal towards 
which we are working our way, if we do our work 
efficiently, this vasana-exhaustion takes place. The goal to 
be constantly remembered is indicated in this stanza: "HE 
FROM WHOM ALL BEINGS ARISE AND BY WHOM 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
1279 
 
ALL THIS IS PERVADED." Th e three equipments --- the 
body, the mind and the intellect, that flutter out into 
activity, are all in themse lves inert matter with no 
consciousness in themselves. It is only at the touch of the 
Light-of-Life that inert matter starts singing its vasanas 
through the various activities.  
To remember constantly, this Consciousness, the Atman --- 
the Atman that lends, as it were, Its dynamism to the 
Matter that invests It in its ac tivities --- is to stand apart 
from all agitations in the fiel d of strife. Just as a musician, 
constantly conscious of the background drone, sings his 
songs easily in tune, just as a dancer dances effortlessly to 
the rhythm of the drum, such a man is never caught on 
the wrong foot ever in life. A new glow of tranquil peace 
and dynamic love comes to shine through all his actions, 
and his achievements radiate the shadowless Light-of-
Perfection, unearthly and Divine.  
Work can thus be changed in to worship by attuning our 
minds all through our activity to the consciousness of the 
Self. A self-dedicated man so working in the 
consciousness of the Supreme pays the greatest homage to 
his Creator. This subtle change in attitude transforms the 
shape of even the most dreary  situation. Even the most 
dreadfully unpleasant field of activity is converted into a 
sacred chamber of devotion --- into a silent hall of prayer -
-- into a quiet seat of meditation!  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
1280 
 
By thus setting one's hands and feet to work in the field-
of-objects with one's mind and intellect held constantly 
conscious of the Divine Presence, one can attain 
"THROUGH THE PERFORMANCE OF ONE'S OWN 
DUTIES THE HIGHEST PERFECTION." Work results in 
self-fulfilment, apart from its legitimate "fruits." The inner 
personality gets integrated, and such an integrated person 
grows in his meditation and evolves quickly.  
"AND YET, WHY SHOULD I NOT GO AND 
MEDITATE?" SEEMS TO BE THE HONEST DOUBT IN 
ARJUNA'S MIND. KRISHNA ANSWERS:  
  
47. Better is one's own duty (thou gh) destitute of merits, than 
the duty of another well-performed. He who does the duty 
ordained by his own nature incurs no sin.  
The opening line of this stanza has been exhaustively 
discussed earlier (III-35). To work in any field ordered by 
one's own vasanas is better, because in that case, there is a 
chance for exhausting the existing vasanas. When an 
individual strives in a fiel d contrary to the existing 
vasanas, he not only fails to gain any exhaustion of the 
existing vasanas, but also creates a new load of vasanas in 
his temperament. Hence, it is said here: "BETTER IS 
ONE'S OWN DHARMA THOUGH IMPERFECT THAN 
THE DHARMA OF ANOTHER WELL-PERFORMED."  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
1281 
 
By performing "duties ordained by one's own nature" 
(Swabhaava-Niyatam-Karma) the individual comes to no 
evil --- meaning, the indivi dual has no chance of 
imprinting any new impressions on his mind --- the 
impressions which, in their maturity, might force him to 
strive, to seek, to achieve and to indulge.  
This closing chapter of the Geeta is a peroration of the 
beautiful discourse of the in spired Divine, and it is, 
naturally therefore, a summary of the whole Geeta. Hence, 
we find here a reiteration of almost all the salient ideas 
which have been discussed earlier, and which are very 
important for the cure of the "Arjuna-disease.  
Anyone can appreciate the logic of it if he considers the 
following: (1) the deadly poison  in the fangs of a serpent 
never kills the serpent; (2) living organisms crawling in 
fermented wine never get drunk; (3) the malarial germs in 
the mosquitoes do not attack them with shivering fevers. 
THE SWABHAAVA OF EACH ONE CANNOT DESTROY 
HIM! If the poison is drawn from the fangs and wine is 
poisoned, the crawling organisms die. Similarly, if the 
Kshatriyas were to perform the duties prescribed for the 
Brahmana-type of equipment, they would be only doing 
harakiri. Arjuna was a Kshatriya; hence retiring from the 
battle-field to a jungle for meditation would have 
destroyed him.  
In short, it is no use employ ing our minds in fields which 
are contrary to our nature. Ever yone has a precise place in 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
1282 
 
the scheme of created thin gs. Each one has his own 
importance and none is to be  despised, for, each can do 
something which the others cannot do so well. There is no 
redundancy in the Lord's creation; not even a single blade 
of grass, anywhere, at any time, is unnecessarily created!  
Everything has a purpose. Not only the good but the bad 
also are His manifestations and serve His purpose. The 
Pandavas' glory is, no doubt, great, but the manifestation 
of the wickedness in the Kauravas is also the glory of His 
creation. Without the latter, the history of the former 
would not have been complete. Nothing is to be 
condemned; none to be despised. Every thing is He. And 
He alone IS.  
BUT IF THE DUTY TO WHICH WE ARE BOUND IS 
RIDDLED WITH EVIL, ARE WE TO FOLLOW IT? 
KRISHNA ANSWERS:  
  
48. One should not abandon, O Kaunteya, the duty to which 
one is born, though faulty; for, are not all undertakings 
enveloped by evil, as fire by smoke?  
After explaining this mu ch about the nature ( Swabhaava) 
and the corresponding station-in-life (Swadharma), Krishna 
builds up the idea to a subtle climax. His advice is general 
and it is meant for all people, of  all times, in all situations. 
Even when the work so ordained by the existing vasanas 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
1283 
 
(Sahajam Karma) is full of evil ( Sadosham), Krishna's advice 
is that one should not relinquish it (Na-Tyajet).  
Superficially reading this declaration in a hurry, one is apt 
to think that this is not sp irituality. But to a careful 
thinker, the term "born with" ( Sahajam) solves the riddle. 
There is an ocean of difference between the meanings of 
the phrases "BORN WITH" and "BORN INTO."  
There are two forces that co ntrol and guide, define and 
determine, our actions --- (i) the impulses brought forth by 
the pressure of the mental te mperaments within; and (ii) 
the pressure of environments that tickles new temptations 
in ourselves. One is to follow faithfully, the subjective 
vasanas, even if they be defective. But at the same time, we 
must courageously renounce  all the demands that the 
objective world makes upon us from without.  
The vasanas o n e  i s  B O R N  W I T H  a r e  t o  b e  l i v e d  t h r o u g h ,  
without ego and desire; while the vasana-creating 
atmosphere INTO which one is born should not be 
allowed to contaminate one's pe rsonality. Krishna is very 
careful in indicating that a spiritual seeker must 
constantly strive hard to st and apart from the shackling 
effects of the environments. According to the Geeta, man 
is the master of circumstances.  To the extent he comes to 
assert this mastery, to that extent he is evolved.  
IN FACT, "ARE NOT ALL ACTIONS (WORKS) 
CLOUDED  BY DEFECTS, AS FI RE IS BY THE SMOKE?" 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
1284 
 
Here the term used to indicate "work" ( Arambha) is very 
important. This Sanskrit term Arambha means "beginning." 
The term was used earlier (XII-16) where also we were 
asked to "RENOUNCE THE SENSE OF AGENCY IN 
ACTIVITY." When there is an  ego-centric sense of self-
arrogation, the "I-am-the-self " arrogation, the "I-am-the-
doer" sense, there is, invariably, creation of new vasanas 
and therefore, it is full of defects (Dosha).  
This defect is as unavoidable as the appearance of smoke 
in fire. The more an oven is ventilated in the atmospheric 
air, the less smoky becomes the fire burning therein. The 
more our inner bosom is ventilated with the 
Consciousness Divine, the less will the ego assert, and 
therefore, no defects can pollute the actions. If there be an 
influx of wrong vasanas within, the earlier we exhaust 
them through "action" --- with out any ego or ego-centric 
desire of enjoying their fruits  --- the quicker shall the load 
of existing vasanas be lifted from our personality.  
WHAT IS THE BENEFIT OF THUS ACTING 
ACCORDING TO THE TEMPERAMENTS WITH WHICH 
ONE IS BORN?  
  
49. He whose intellect is unattached everywhere, who has 
subdued his self, from whom desire has fled, he, through 
renunciation, attains the Sup reme State of Freedom-from-
action.  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
1285 
 
It must be remembered, that the entire Geeta is addressed 
to Prince Arjuna standing confused at the immensity of 
his duty. He wants to run away into the jungle and live in 
a spirit of what he understa nds as 'renunciation.' Lord 
Krishna's thesis in the entire Geeta is that a MERE running 
away from life and its duties is not Samnyasa nor is it 
renunciation. Here, in the stan za, the Lord is defining the 
State-of-Actionlessness ( Naishkarmya-Siddhi). This state is 
reached when we do not iden tify ourselves with the 
equipments-of-matter which are the instruments-of-
perception, the three instruments of false interpretation of 
Truth (Body, Mind and Intellect). To regain our life in 
Pure Consciousness is the Supreme State.  
When we forget our spiritual dignity, the misconception 
of the ego arises; we lose our real personality and come to 
believe that we are merely the limited ego. Such self-
forgetfulness can be observed in any drunken reveller. He 
forgets his individual person ality and status in life and 
assumes to himself a false iden tity and continues to be in 
it as long as he is in a state of intoxication. In his false 
concept of himself the drunken fool acts, disgracing his 
education and station in life.  
The ego arises when we are ig norant and forgetful of our 
spiritual nature. When this 'ignorance'is ended, there is 
the experience of the Infinite Bliss of the All-Full-
Consciousness. Naturally, th ere is no want felt, and 
therefore, no desire can arise. When desires are absent, the 
thought-breedings end. When thoughts are dried up, 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
1286 
 
actions, which are the parade of thoughts, marching out 
through the archway of the bo dy, are no more. This state 
is called "ACTIONLESSNESS" --- Naishkarmya Siddhi.  
The Supreme State described so elaborately in the 
Upanishadic literature and indicated here by the technical 
term ' Naishkarmya-Siddhi,' is that 'WISE' state-of-being 
wherein there is no 'ignorance .' DESIRES are the children 
of 'ignorance'; THOUGHTS ari se from desires; ACTIONS 
are thoughts expressed in the outer world. In the spirituo-
psychology of Vedanta we may thus say that 'ignorance'is 
the great-grandfather of action! With the 'knowledge' of 
the Spirit, 'ignorance'ends, and in that State, thoughts and 
actions cannot be. This is the State of Full Awakening, and 
with reference to its previous condition as expressed and 
manifested through the body, this condition is indicated 
as "ACTIONLESS-NESS" or  "THOUGHTLESS-NESS" or 
"DESIRELESS-NESS."  
The Geetaacharya, in this stanza, declares that this State of 
Perfection, defined as the St ate of Actionlessness, cannot 
be gained by a cheap and ig nominious escape from the 
fields of life's activities. Making use of the fields, we must 
gain in purity by getting rid of the existing vasanas, 
through selfless activities. Making use of the fields, we 
must gain in purity by getting rid of the existing vasanas, 
through selfless activities which are prescribed to each one 
of us according to the type to which we naturally belong. 
Arjuna being a " Kshatriya", his duty is to fight; and by 
fighting alone will he exhaust his vasanas. By the 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
1287 
 
exhaustion of the vasanas alone can one hope to reach the 
Supreme State of Pure Awareness.  
AN UNDERSTANDING UNATTACHED EVERYWHERE 
(Asakta-Buddhih Sarvatra) --- An intellect that is attached to 
sensuous things of the world outside knows no peace 
within itself. It gets agitated and the frail body gets 
shattered as the fuming mind escapes through it in its 
hunt for satisfaction among the sense-objects. A 'clean-
shaven intellect,' devoid of all the cobwebs of attachments 
with the equipments of perceptions, feeling and thinking, 
and their respective objects perceived, felt or thought of, is 
the vehicle that stands dissolved, revealing THAT which 
pulsates through them all. This is the true State-of-
Actionlessness and a man who has earlier disciplined his 
intellect alone can attain it.  
In the case of Arjuna, his tall talks of detachment and 
renunciation were false urges of escapism paraded as an 
angelic urge. His Samnyasa arose out of his "attachment" to 
his kith and kin, while true Samnyasa must arise out of 
"detachment."  
ONE WHO HAS SUBDUED HIS EGO ( Jitaatmaa) --- An 
intellect of complete detachment is an impossible dream. 
The seeker subdues his heart which ever seeks its 
flickering joys in sense-gratif ications. This self-mastery of 
the mind is impossible as lo ng as there are even the 
m i n u t e s t  t r a c e s  o f  d e s i r e  i n  h i m .  O n e  f r o m  w h o m  a l l  
desires have fled ( Vigata-sprihah) alone can subdue the 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
1288 
 
mind, and such a seeker alone can accomplish the state of 
complete detachment of his intellect from the world of 
sense-objects.  
M i n d  i s  t h e  s e a t  o f  a l l  v a n i t ies of agency, like "I am the 
doer" sense ( Kartritwa-bhaavanaa). The intellect is the seat 
of all false arrogations that "I-am-the-enjoyer" ( Bhoktritwa-
bhavanaa). These two together make up the ego, and it is 
fed, nurtured and nourished by its clinging attachments 
(spriha) to the joy that is in the objects of the world outside. 
By correct analysis and investigations, when the "spriha" is 
dried up, both the senses of enjoyership and doership will 
get steadily sublimated, leaving behind the Infinite 
experience of the Self. Th e Geeta is never tired of 
repeating that self-restraint and freedom from desire are 
the unavoidable pre-requisites for spiritual growth. 
Herein, we have a beautiful example of explaining the 
Supreme Goal, not in achieving any Higher State, but as 
the state of complete detachment from the lower urges.  
FREEDOM FROM ACTION IS A CONDITION IN 
WHICH ALONE THE EXPERIENCES OF THE SUPREME 
BEING CAN RUSH IN. HOW?  LEARN THIS FROM ME 
IN BRIEF:  
  
50. How he, who has attained perfection, reaches BRAHMAN 
(the Eternal) , that in brief do you learn from Me, O! Kaunteya, 
that Supreme State-of-Knowledge.  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
1289 
 
Here we are told how to get detached from the wrong 
tendencies in life, and how, to that extent, we attain 
serenity and composure. Detachment from matter-
hallucinations itself is the rediscovery of the spiritual 
beauty. The following few stanzas make a beautiful 
section of this chapter which refreshingly reminds us of 
the various descriptions of a Man-of-Perfection that were 
given earlier, throughout the Lord's Song. When we thus 
get purified, meaning, when  the intellect becomes free 
from its attachments, and the mind and body come well 
under the control of the intelle ct, then alone are we fit for 
the "Path-of-Meditation," which is the process of 
accomplishing and fulfilling renunciation of the lower, 
base, ego-sense.  
It is not possible to renounce  all attachments completely, 
unless one experiences the Truth, and thereby becomes 
the Infinite Self. Our attempt now is to reduce our 
attachments to the irreducible minimum, leaving but the 
thinnest film of 'ignorance'veiling the Supreme. Krishna 
says here, "LEARN THAT FROM ME IN BRIEF, O, son of 
Kunti, how to remove this last lingering film of 
'ignorance'and thereby get permanently established in that 
Supreme God-consciousness, which is the Self."  
THE TECHNIQUE-OF-MEDITATION IS BEING 
DESCRIBED NOW; THIS AND THE FOLLOWING TWO 
STANZAS EXPLAIN WHAT SHOULD BE THE 
CONDITION OF THE EQUIPMENTS OF PERCEPTION, 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
1290 
 
FEELING, AND THINKING AT THE TIME OF PERFECT 
MEDITATION:  
  
51. Endowed with a pure intellect; controlling the self by 
firmness; relinquishing sound and other objects; and 
abandoning attraction and hatred;  
ENDOWED WITH PURE UN DERSTANDING --- An 
intellect that has grown to remain without vaasanaas. An 
intellect that has thus purified itself of all its tendencies of 
joy-hunting is indicated here as pure ( Vishuddha) 
understanding.  
CONTROLLING THE MIND AND THE SENSE WITH 
FORTITUDE --- These two sabotage the harmony and 
balance in a meditator when he is at his seat of meditation. 
At that moment the sense-orga ns receive a rush of stimuli 
with which they can disturb the music of meditation in the 
mind; or, often the mind can topple down from its steady 
concentration, by itself remembering its own experiences 
of the past. By controlling bo th these, which were earlier 
described as Shama and Dama, the seeker comes to tune 
himself up properly. He becomes invulnerable to all such 
attacks.  
The idea of controlling the mind and sense-organs 
described in the earlier epithet is clearly elucidated in the 
second line of the stanza. RENOUNCING SENSE-
OBJECTS --- controlling the sense-organs means allowing 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
1291 
 
none of the stimuli such as sound, form, touch, taste or 
smell to infiltrate through their respective gateways of 
ears, eyes, skin, tongue an d the nose. When thus a 
complete wall-of-understanding has been built around the 
mind, protecting it from any onslaught from the outer 
world, the mind can, of its own accord, either dance in 
some REMEMBERED joy, or sob in grief at some 
EXPECTED sorrow --- because of  its likes and dislikes, 
loves and hates. Therefore, th ese instinctive impulses of 
the mind are also to be controlled.  
To summarise, a meditator is on e who has: (1) an intellect 
purified of all its extrovert desires; (2) a mind, together 
with the sense-organs, brought well under the control of 
this intellect, so purified; (3) the sense-organs no more 
contacting the sense-objects; and (4) a mind that has given 
up its ideas of likes and dislik es. It is this individual who 
becomes a successful meditator.  
AGAIN:  
  
52. Dwelling in solitude; eating but little; speech, body and 
mind subdued; always engaged in meditation and 
concentration; taking refuge in dispassion;  
DWELLING IN SOLITUDE ( Vivikta-Sevee) --- A seeker 
who has developed all the above-mentioned physical, 
mental and intellectual adjustments, must now seek a 
sequestered spot of loneliness. This does not mean that he 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
1292 
 
must move out of a town to a jungle. The term indicates 
only a spot "wherein there is  the least disturbance." Even 
in the midst of a market th ere are moments when it is 
deserted and quiet. If the seeker is sincere, he can discover 
such moments of complete solitude under his own roof.  
EATING BUT LITTLE --- Over -indulgence and stuffing 
oneself with highly nutritive food is fattening the body 
and thickening the subtlety of one's intellectual activities. 
Temperance is the law for all spiritual students (VI-17).  
CONTROLLING SPEECH, BODY AND MIND --- The 
mind cannot be subdued unless the body is brought under 
its command. The body is constituted of the sense-organs 
of perception and action. The grossest manifestation of the 
mind is action, and to control action is to discipline the 
mind. The term SPEECH used here indicates "all sense-
organs-of-action and their funct ions"; and the term BODY 
represents "the organs-of-perception and all their activities 
of perceiving their respecti ve objects." Unless these two 
sets of organs are controlled, the mind cannot be subdued.  
In fact, the mind ITSELF, at  the body-level , becomes the 
sense-organs, and the mind projected away from the body 
is the great universe of sense-objects. When the mind, 
playing through the body, iden tifies itself with its own 
projections --- the objects --- it is called PERCEPTION; and 
when it comes in contact with the world-of-objects seeking 
satisfaction and entertainment, it is called ACTION. 
Disciplining action and regulating perception --- in short, 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
1293 
 
eliminating the ego-centric atti tude in all our perceptions, 
in all our relationships with the world-of-objects, is what 
is advised here.  
EVER ENGAGED IN MEDITATION --- Controlling the 
actions and perceptions of the mind is not possible as long 
as the mind is constantly flowing out through the sense-
organs towards the sense-objects. Seeking sense-
gratifications, the mind is in a constant state of agitation. 
To quieten such a mind, it is  necessary that we must give 
it some "point-of-contemplation" wherein, as it engages 
itself more and more, it shall discover consummate 
happiness and get sufficiently disengaged from 
everything else. Diverting th e mind from the world of 
sense-objects and maintaining it  in a steady flow towards 
contemplation of the Lord in an utter attitude of 
identification, is called MEDI TATION. To be steadily in a 
state of such an all-consumin g dedication unto a nobler 
and higher ideal is the method of cooling down the mind's 
boiling lust for sense-enjoyments.  
POSSESSED OF DISPASSION --- Dispassion is Vairaagya. 
It is not a mere self-denial of any object of enchantment, 
but it is a state when the mind  rebounds upon itself from 
the objects as a result of it s discovery that the objects 
contain no glow of happiness. The essence of dispassion is 
not in our running away from the object; from a truly dis- 
passionate man, the objects run away in inexplicable 
despair.  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
1294 
 
When the old interests of a pe rson die away and when he 
is ordered by new intellectual visions, new interests rise 
up in his mind; then the ol d world-of-objects around him 
suddenly retires, yielding place to the new set of things 
that he has willed around him by his newly developed 
mind. As long as I was a vicious man, sensuous friends 
and pleasure-seekers crowded my drawing-room; when I 
changed my way-of-life and took to serious social work 
and political activities, the group of idlers went away 
yielding their places to politicians and social workers. 
After a time I grew in my mental make-up, and so, in my 
spiritual interests, even these politicians with their power-
politics, and the social work ers with their unspeakable 
jealousies and rivalries retire d, yielding their places to 
men of thought and spiritual benediction. This is a typical 
example of how, as a mind grows, it leaves its old toys 
behind and enters totally into a greater field of the nobler 
gains of life.  
To sum up, a true seeker of the Higher Life must seek 
solitude, live in temperance, subdue his speech, body and 
mind, and must live in a spirit of dispassion, a true life of 
aspiration to heave himself towards the ideal.  
THESE EFFORTS CAN BUILD UP A TEMPLE OF 
SUCCESS ONLY WHEN THE INNER PERSONALITY 
HAS A DEEP FOUNDATION UPON CERTAIN 
ENDURING VALUES OF LIFE. THESE ARE 
ENUMERATED IN THE FOLLOWING:  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
1295 
 
  
53. Having abandoned egoism, power, arrogance, desire, anger 
and aggrandisement, and freed from  the notion of 'mine, ' and 
so peaceful --- he is fit to become BRAHMAN.  
If the preceding verse indicated things that are to be 
acquired and brought about in the relatively outer 
surfaces of the meditator's pe rsonality, here we have a list 
of things which are to be renounced from the inner core of 
the meditator's personality. Here are the enduring values-
of-life a meditator must learn to live.  
The items enumerated in the stanza are not, in fact, so 
many different items, but they are all different 
manifestations of one and the same wrong notion, namely 
the "I-act-mentality" ( Ahamkara). When this "sense-of-
agency" develops, ego-centric vanities intensify within our 
bosom, and they manifest as "power" ( Balam) --- the 
"power" to strive and struggle, sweat and strain, to fulfil 
passions and desires. A powerful ego will, with each 
success in the sensuous world, gather to itself more and 
more "pride," or "arrogance" (Darpam).  
To an individual personality, working under the influence 
of both "power" and "arrogance," "lust and anger" ( Kaama 
and Krodha) are but natural, and thereafter, he becomes a 
mad machine of restlessness within and of disturbances 
around, ever anxiously bearing himself down upon the 
society in order that he may, by means fair or foul, 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
1296 
 
acquire, possess and aggrandise  the objects of his fancy, 
indicated here by the term "aggrandisement" (Parigraha).  
The six items listed above are nothing but manifestations 
of the "sense-of-agency" --- the 'I-act-mentality' 
(Ahamkaara). Krishna asks the meditator to forsake these 
and thus to immediately become egoless ( Nirmamah) and 
peaceful (Shaantah). This is not the peace of the grave nor 
the quiet of the desert; this is the peace that arises out of 
the fullness  
of 'wisdom,' out of our absolute satisfaction experienced 
in the Realm-of-Perfection.  
All restlessness is caused by the ego and its onward rush 
towards finite objects, seeking among the ephemeral, a 
satisfaction and joy that is permanent and enduring. 
When this sense-of-agency an d endless seeking of sense-
gratifications have been renounced, the seeker ( saadhaka) 
experiences a relative quiet within his bosom. He who is 
tuned thus, through understanding and discipline, can 
discover in himself the required balance and equipoise to 
rocket his total personality into the higher climbs of 
"conscious unfoldment." The stanza does not say that such 
an individual has reached Perfect ion, but it definitely says 
that "HE IS FIT TO BECO ME BRAHMAN." The above is 
but a preliminary preparation for the final realisation.  
WHAT THEN IS THE NEXT STAGE OF 
DEVELOPMENT? THE GEETA EXPLAINS:  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
1297 
 
 
54. Becoming BRAHMAN, serene in the Self, he neither 
grieves nor desires; the same to all beings, he obtains a supreme 
devotion towards Me.  
After liquidating the ego and its manifestations --- 
enumerated in the preceding stanza as power, pride, lust, 
passion and sense of possession --- the seeker comes to 
experience a relatively greater peace within, as he is 
released from all the confusio ns generally created by the 
psychological mal-adjustments and intellectual false 
evaluations of life. This newly discovered inner 
tranquillity, no doubt artificially propped up for the time 
being by severe self-discip line, should be positively 
reinforced by definite efforts and constant vigilance.  
With constant self-effort, relative peace in the mind is to 
be maintained for longer periods of time and zealously 
guarded. Joys and sorrows will be constantly reaching our 
bosom from the outer world; we are helpless before them. 
For, even when the "sense-of-agency" has been renounced, 
the other aspect of the ego, "I-enjoy-mentality" (Bhoktritwa-
bhaavanaa) will assert itself and poison the mind of the 
meditator. A worm cut into two pieces becomes two 
separate, independent living worms ere long. So too, if 
one aspect of the ego, the "I -do-mentality" is conquered, 
we must equally attend to th e destruction of the other 
aspect of the ego, the "I-e njoy-mentality;" or else, the 
surviving part will revive within a very short time and we 
shall discover a healthier ego, potentially more powerful, 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
1298 
 
dangerously rising out of the seemingly dead 
individuality.  
One who has read well, refl ected upon and understood 
the theme of the Absolute Reality as discussed in the 
Scriptures, is indicated here by the term " Brahma-Bhootah." 
This word employed in this verse should not be construed 
as "one who has become Brahman." It can only mean "one 
who has convinced oneself of the existence and nature of 
the Reality as discussed in the Scriptures." Once this 
Spiritual Truth is understood, the student necessarily 
becomes less agitated, because, all disturbances enter our 
life through our identificati on with the equipments-of-
experiences only. To the extent an intellect realises the 
existence of the diviner aspect in it, and so automatically 
withdraws its all-out clinging to the matter-realm, to that 
extent it is not disturbed by the objects of perception, 
feeling and thought. Thus it discovers a growing 
tranquillity (Prasannaatmaa) within itself.  
A seeker who has gained the "knowledge" of Brahman 
through STUDY, and make it his own through 
REFLECTION, gains the tranquillity of composure as a 
result of his understanding, and therefore experiences a 
partial liquidation of his ego-sense. Thereby he discovers 
in himself the courage to stan d apart, both from grief and 
desire. He grieves not ( Na Shochati) because he feels no 
incompleteness in himself, as he  used to feel in the earlier 
days of his arrogant ego. Since there is no sense of 
imperfection, his intellect no longer spins new and novel 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
1299 
 
plans for satisfactions and temporary gratifications, which 
are called desires. Naturally, one who grieves not in life 
desires not ( Na Kaankshati) for the possession of anything 
to make his happiness complete.  
A tranquil seeker --- who, in his understanding, comes to 
desire nothing and has developed an independent source 
of happiness which is free from the presence of the 
absence of any external environment --- lives in the world, 
with a totally new set of values  of life, in which, according 
to him, there is nothing but the constant experience of the 
Divine presence. Naturally, he develops an equanimity of 
vision (V-18, 19 and 20).  
THIS TYPE OF AN INDIVIDUAL ATTAINS SUPREME 
DEVOTION UNTO ME --- Earlie r, an entire chapter has 
been devoted to the discussion  on devotion (Ch. XII) 
wherein we found that, according to the Scripture, 
d e v o t i o n  i s  m e a s u r e d  b y  o u r  sense of identification with 
the Higher Ideal. In order to  identify with the Infinite 
Truth, the seeker must have a definite amount of 
detachment from his usual channels of dissipation, both in 
the outer world and the realms within.  
The previous verse indicated the methods of detachment 
and it was said that he who has accomplished them in his 
inner composition is the only one who is capable of 
striving for and succeeding in a true identification with 
the play of the Infinite in  and through the finite. The 
expansiveness of vision, the catholicity of love and the 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
1300 
 
release from sense preoccupation --- all these are 
necessary in order to produce in the seeker, supreme love 
for the Lord. There is yet another stage in one's pilgrimage 
to Truth.  
WHAT THEN IS THE NEXT STAGE?  
  
55. By devotion he knows Me in Essence, what and who I am; 
then, having known Me in My E ssence, he forthwith enters into 
the Supreme.  
BY DEVOTION HE COMES TO KNOW ME --- Devotion, 
as we have explained, is "lov e for the Supreme." Love is 
measured by the degree of identification the lover 
maintains with the beloved. When an ego-centric 
individuality, having made all the above adjustments, 
increasingly seeks and discovers  its identity with the Self, 
it comes to experience the true nature of the Self more and 
more clearly. Such a seeker comes to understand "WHAT 
AND WHO I AM."  
In the entire Geeta, the first pe rson singular is used by the 
Lord to indicate the Supreme Go al. It is not Lord Krishna, 
as an individual person who is indicated by the terms 'I' 
and 'Me' as used in these discourses. Remember, this is the 
Lord's own Song, sung to revive His devotees, and the 
pronouns used here represent the Paramatman. To know 
the Self means to know both Its nature and identity. These 
are the topics in all scriptures. But the scriptural study 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
1301 
 
gives us only an intellectual comprehension of Truth and 
not its Essence ( Tattwatah), a spiritual apprehension of 
Truth as a lived experience.  
THEN, HAVING KNOWN ME IN ESSENCE --- When 
this experience comes through a slow and steady 
unfoldment of the Light of Consciousness, through the 
dropping of the veils of 'ignorance'created by our 
identifications with the body , we come to apprehend, IN 
TOTO, the Infinite. The individu ality or the ego, ends and 
"HE THEREAFTER ENTERS ME."  
The "ENTRY" mentioned here is not like that of a man 
entering a structure, a house separate from himself. There 
is no ego to enter into the plane of God-consciousness. The 
term "ENTRY" is used here exactly in the same fashion as 
"the dreamer ENTERS the waking state." The dreamer 
cannot retain his own individuality when he ENTERS the 
waking world, but he himself becomes the "waker." 
Similarly, when the ego ENTE RS God-consciousness, the 
individuality cannot retain  itself as such. The 
m i s c o n c e p t i o n  t h a t  h e  i s  a n individual ends and he 
rediscovers, becomes or awakens to, the Infinite 
Brahmanhood --- the State of Krishna-Consciousness.  
DEVOTION FOR THE LORD IS NEVER COMPLETE 
WITHOUT SERVICE TO THE LIVING WORLD OF 
CREATURES:  
  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
1302 
 
56. Doing all actions, always taki ng refuge in Me, by My grace 
he obtains the Eternal, Indestructible State or Abode.  
The philosophy of the Geeta is extremely dynamic. The 
Song of the Lord is an innocent-looking magazine of 
power which can be detonated by correct understanding. 
The warmth of living makes it explode, blasting the crust 
of ignorance that has grown around the noble personality 
and its divine possibilities in the student.  
Devotion to the Lord ( Bhakti), in the Geeta, is not a mere 
passive surrender unto the ideal, nor a mere physical 
ritualism. Lord Krishna in sists, not only upon our 
identification with the High er through an intelligent 
process of detachment, from both the senses, of 
"AGENCY" and "ENJOYMENT," but also upon the 
understanding and the inner experience positively 
brought out in all our contacts with the outer world, in all 
our relationships.  
Religion, to Lord Krishna, is not fulfilled by a mere 
withdrawal from the outer world of sense objects, but in a 
definite come-back into the world, bringing into it the 
fragrance of peace and joy of the yonder, to brighten and 
beautify the drab, inert objects that constitute the world. 
Therefore, after describing one who can be considered as 
the higher devotee, in this stanza, Krishna now adds 
another condition to be fulfilled by all seekers.  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
1303 
 
The Geetaacharya never wants to receive any devotee at 
His gate, nor will He give an audience to anyone, unless 
the seeker caries the passport of  self-less service to society 
--- "PERFORMING CONTINUOUSLY ALL ACTIONS, 
ALWAYS TAKING REFUGE IN ME."  
In order to serve without the "sense-of-agency," the 
practical method is "TAKE REFUGE IN ME." Such a 
seeker, who is constantly working in fulfilling his 
obligatory duties to society and towards himself has "My 
grace" (Mat prasaada).  
The Supreme has no existence ap art from His Grace; He is 
His Grace, His Grace is He . The Grace of the Self, 
therefore, means more and more the play of divine 
Consciousness in and through the personality layers in the 
individual. In an individual, to the extent his mind and 
intellect are available, in their discipline to be ruled over 
by spiritual truth, to that extent he is under the blessing of 
His Grace.  
HE ATTAINS THE ETERNAL IMMUTABLE STATE --- 
When thus working in the wo rld, without the sense of 
agency and enjoyment, the existing vasanas become 
exhausted and the ego gets eliminated. Awakening thus 
from the delusory projections of the ego, the individual 
attains the State of Pure Co nsciousness and comes to live 
thereafter the Eternal, I mmortal State --- THE KRISHNA-
STATE OF PERFECTION.  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
1304 
 
In the preceding three stanzas  the "Paths" of Knowledge, 
Devotion and Action are indica ted, and in all of them the 
same goal of realising the seeker's oneness with the 
Supreme has been indicated. Integral saadhanaa is the core 
of the Geeta technique. To synthesize the methods of 
Work, Devotion and Knowledge is at once the discipline 
of the body, mind, and intellect. For, all disciplines 
PURSUED AT THE BODY LEVEL, in order to control the 
mind and turn it towards the ideal, are called Karma Yoga; 
all methods of channelising emotions in order to 
DISCIPLINE THE MIND to contemplate upon the Higher 
are called Bhakti Yoga and all study and reflection, 
detachment and meditation, PRACTISED AT THE 
INTELLECTUAL LEVEL, whereby, again the mind is 
lifted to the realm of the s ilent experience of its own 
Infinitude are called Jnaana Yoga. To practise all the three 
during our life is to discipline all the three layers in us. 
Thus, the philosophy of total spiritual transformation of 
the perceiver, the feeler and th e thinker, all at once, is the 
prime contribution that the Geeta has to make to the 
timeless tradition of the Hindu culture, as available for us 
in the Upanishads.  
THEREFORE:  
  
57. Mentally renouncing all action s in Me, having Me as the 
Highest Goal, resorting to the YOGA -of-discrimination, ever 
fix your mind in Me.  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
1305 
 
RESIGNING MENTALLY ALL DEEDS TO ME --- Both 
the ego and the ego-centric anxi eties for enjoying are to be 
renounced at the altar of the Lord, and thus to act in the 
world is the 'path,' through which a man of action reaches 
the greater cultural climes. This idea of surrender has been 
discussed earlier, very exhaustively. This spirit of 
surrender can come only when  the student has infinite 
courage to maintain a stea dy aspiration for "HAVING ME 
AS THE HIGHEST GOAL." Th e mind needs a positive 
hold upon something, before it can be persuaded to leave 
its present props.  
RESORTING TO BUDDHI YOGA  --- The intellect's main 
function is discrimination. To discriminate the false from 
the true, and to fix ourselves on the path of seeking the 
true, is called Buddhi yoga. Controlling life and regulating 
its movements through discrimination is Karma Yoga. And 
thus the term 'Buddhi yoga' is an original coined-word, met 
with only in the Geeta, to indi cate in essence the "Path-of-
Selfless-Action." It has been  used in the very early 
portions of the Geeta and there it has been very 
exhaustively explained.  
PLEASE EVER FIX YOUR MIND UPON ME --- One who 
has fixed Krishna - Tattwa as the goal of his life, one who 
surrenders himself mentally at all times at this altar, and 
serves all His creatures, one who ever discriminates and 
avoids all undivine thoughts and ego-centric self-
assertions --- such a one alone can naturally come to fix his 
thoughts constantly upon the Lord.  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
1306 
 
It is an eternal law of mental life that "AS WE THINK SO 
WE BECOME." A devotee who has thus come to live all 
his activities in dedication to his goal, the Krishna-
Consciousness, must necessarily come to live as Krishna, 
and experience the Eternal, Immutable, State of the Self.  
SUPPOSING ONE REFUSES TO FOLLOW THIS 
SEEMINGLY ARDUOUS 'P ATH,' WHAT WOULD BE 
HIS CONDITION? LISTEN:  
  
58. Fixing your mind upon Me, you shall, by My grace, 
overcome all obstacles, but if, from egoism, you will not hear 
Me, you shall perish.  
Lord Krishna, in essence, says: "By your thoughts, 
renounce all your activities in Me." All activities in the 
world are only expressions of  the Divine Conscious-ness 
flashing Its brilliance through the body. In all activities be 
conscious of the Lord, without Whom no action is ever 
possible. Keep Him as your Goal. Make your intellect 
constantly aware of this "Lor d of all actions." Gradually, 
the mind and the body will begin to work under the 
command of such an inspired intellect.  
How will this constant remembrance of the Lord help? 
This is now being answered. Krishna says: "HE, WHO 
HAS COMPLETELY FIXED ALL HIS THOUGHTS UPON 
ME, WILL CROSS OVER A LL DIFFICULTIES BY MY 
GRACE." Most of our obstacles in life are imaginary --- 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
1307 
 
created by false fears and deceitful anxieties of our own 
confused mind. The "grace" referred to here is "the result 
accrued in our mind when it is properly tuned up to and 
peacefully settled in contemplation upon the Infinite." It 
does not mean any special consideration shown by the all-
loving Lord to some rare persons of His own choice. The 
Grace of the all-pervading is present everywhere because 
Grace is His form. Just as the ever-present sunlight on a 
bright day cannot illumine my room as long as the 
windows are closed, so too, the harmony and joy of life of 
the Infinite cannot penetrate in to our life, as long as the 
windows of discrimination in us are tightly shut. To the 
extent the windows of my room  are opened, to that extent 
the room is flooded by the sunlight; to the extent a seeker 
pursues his saadhanaa and brings about the above-
mentioned adjustments, to that extent the Grace of the Self 
shall flood his within.  
In the second line of the verse, the Lord warns against all 
those who, in their utter ignorance, disobey this Law of 
Life. Natural laws are irrevocable; they have neither eyes, 
nor ears. They just continue in their own rhythm and that 
man is happy who discovers the law and obeys it 
implicitly.  
BUT IF, FROM EGOISM, YOU WILL NOT HEAR ME, 
YOU SHALL PERISH --- This is  not a threat hurled down 
upon mankind by a tyrannical power, to frighten the 
human beings into obedience. This is not comparable with 
the threat of hell held out by other religions. This is a mere 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
1308 
 
statement of fact; even if Newton himself were to jump 
from the third floor balcony of his house, the gravitational 
force would indeed, act upon him also! There is an 
inevitability in nature's la ws. Man is free to choose 
freedom or bondage. The path of freedom is described 
above, and in this open and sincere statement, the Lord is 
only showing great anxiety, not to mince matters, but to 
be callously frank in His expressions.  
Guidance to this true "way-of-life" always comes to us 
from the depth of our nature, expressed in the language of 
"the soft, small voice of th e within." But man's ego and 
ego-centric desires force him to disobey the ringing voice 
of the Lord and such a one pursues a life of base vulgarity, 
seeking sense-gratification and ultimately bringing 
himself down to be punished by his own uncontrolled 
emotions and unchastened ideas. Hence the warning: 
"YOU SHALL PERISH."  
TO WEAVE THE IDEA INTO  THE VERY WARP AND 
WOOF OF ARJUNA'S LIFE, THE LORD SAYS:  
  
59. Filled with egoism, if you think, "I will not fight, " vain in 
this, your resolve; (for) nature will compel you.  
General statements of truth are too volatile to be retained 
in one's understanding permanently. But the general 
statements of life's princi ples, when woven into the 
texture of one's own experiences, remain as one's own 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
1309 
 
earned "knowledge," and they become permanent 
WISDOM. Therefore, Krishna is trying to bring the 
philosophical contents of hi s discourse into the very 
substance of Arjuna's own immediate problem.  
If, due to a sense of self-importance, the self-conceited 
Arjuna were to think "I WILL NOT FIGHT," he shall be 
thinking so in vain! The temperament of Arjuna must seek 
its expression, and being a Kshatriya of "passionate" 
nature, his Rajoguna will assert itself; "NATURE WILL 
COMPEL YOU." One who has eaten salt must feel terribly 
thirsty, ere long. The false arg uments raised by Arjuna for 
not fighting the battle are a ll compromises made by his 
ego with the situation which he is compelled to face in the 
crush of events around him.  
Even if he were to follow his temporary attitude of 
escapism and desist from fighting, it is a law of nature that 
his mental temperament would assert itself at a later 
period, when, alas! he may no t have the field to express 
himself in and exhaust his vasanas.  
ALSO BECAUSE OF THE FOLLOWING REASON, "YOU 
MUST FIGHT."  
  
60. O son of Kunti, bound by your own KARMA (action) born 
of your own nature, that which, through delusion you wish not 
to do, even that you shall do, helplessly.  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
1310 
 
Continuing, the Lord, in effect, says: "I am asking you to 
fight, not because I have no personal sympathies for you, 
but because that is the only course left for you. You have 
no other choice. Though you now insist that you "WILL 
NOT FIGHT," it is merely an  illusion. You will have to 
fight, because, your nature will assert itself."  
The actions, we do, are propelled by our own vaasanaas 
and they shackle our personality. Arjuna is essentially of 
the Rajoguna type, and therefore, he must fight. The 
Pandava Prince cannot, all of a sudden, pose to have the 
beauties of the Sattwic nature of heart and retire to a 
solitary place to live a serene life of steady contemplation 
and come to experience the consequent self-unfoldment.  
Because of wrong thinking and miscalculations, Arjuna 
feels that he does not like wa r, and therefore, he is not 
ready to face it. But in spite of his determination, he will 
be compelled to fight by his own nature, ordered by the 
existing vasanas in him. This is the irrevocable law of life.  
He who has no control over his mind becomes a victim of 
circumstances. He gets thrown up and down by the whim 
and fancy of things around him. But he who gains inner 
mastery over the mind and stands firmly rooted and 
unshaken by the circumstance s is the one who will revel 
(Rati) in the Pure Light ( Bhaa) of wisdom; and the country 
that recognises this cultur e has acquired its immortal 
name 'Bhaarata.'  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
1311 
 
In the previous two or three stanzas, we are told by 
Krishna, "REMEMBER ME CONSTANTLY." What does 
this mean? How should we remember? Does it mean 
meditating upon the Lord? What should be our 
relationship with Him? Are we to remember Him as a 
historical event, or remember Him as intimately connected 
with us as a 'Presence' expressing Itself at all times in and 
through us?  
ALL THESE QUESTIONS ARE AP T TO RISE UP IN THE 
MIND OF ANY SERIOUS STUDENT. THEY ARE 
ANSWERED IN THE FOLLOWING:  
  
61. The Lord dwells in the hearts of all beings, O Arjuna, 
causing all beings, by His illu sive power, to revolve, as if 
mounted on a machine.  
The advice given by the Lord is clear and beyond all 
shades of doubt. "Remem ber the Lord," says the 
Geetaacharaya, "as the One who organises, controls and 
directs all things in the world and without Whose 
command nothing ever happens. In His 'presence' alone 
everything can happen --- therefore remember Him as 
Ishwara." The steam functioning in the cylinder of the 
engine is the "Lord" of th e engine, and without it the 
piston can never move. It is the steam which provides the 
locomotion and renders the train dynamic.  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
1312 
 
Do not remember the Lord as merely a personified Power, 
as Shiva in Kailasha, as Vishnu in Vaikuntha, as the Father in 
Heaven etc., but recognise Hi m as one who dwells in the 
heart of EVERY CREATURE. Just as the address of a 
person is given, in order that  the seeker of that person 
may locate the individual in a busy town, so also in order 
to seek, discover and identify  with the Lord, His "Local 
address" is being provided here by Bhagawan Krishna!  
When we say that "THE LORD DWELLS IN THE HEART 
OF ALL LIVING BEINGS," we do  not mean the physical 
heart. In philosophy the use of  the word "heart" is more 
figurative than literal.  
RESIDING THUS IN THE HEART --- meaning, in the 
mind of one who has cultivated the divine qualities such 
as love, kindness, patience, cheer, affection, tenderness, 
forgiveness, charity etc. The Lord lends His Power to all 
living creatures to act on. He energizes everyone. 
Everything revolves around Him --- like the unseen hand 
that manipulates the dolls in the marionette-play. The 
puppets have no existence, no vitality, no emotions of 
their own; they are only the expressions of the will and 
intention of the unseen hand behind them.  
It is not the matter in us th at moves or becomes conscious 
of the world of transactions; or else the cucumber and the 
pumpkin, the corn and the tomato of which our bodies are 
made, will also have locomotion or Consciousness. When 
the same vegetables are co nsumed as food and are 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
1313 
 
digested and assimilated to become part of our physical 
body, the matter, in contact with  the Life-Principle in us 
becomes vibrant and dynamic, capable of perceiving, 
feeling and thinking. The Spark -of-Life presiding over the 
body, the Pure Eternal Consciousness, is that which, as it 
were, vitalises inert matter. Pure Consciousness in itself 
does not act; but in Its Presence the matter envelopments 
get vitalised, and then they SEEM to act.  
The Atman, conditioned by the body, mind and intellect, 
expresses dynamism and action, and creates what we 
recognise as the manifested individuality. "The Supreme 
functioning through the total bodies as the cause of all 
action" is called Ishwara. Life functioning in each one of us 
is the master, the controller, the director and the Lord of 
our individual activities.  
The essential Life in all of us is one and the same; 
therefore, the Total Life fun ctions through and manifests 
as the entire universe, energising all existing equipments. 
Thus expressing through all activities, is the Lord of the 
Universe, Ishwara. With this understanding, if you read 
the stanza again, you will comprehend the metaphor 
employed herein.  
IF THERE BE THUS A LORD WITHIN, MEANING A 
POWER THAT RULES OVER AND GUIDES ALL MY 
ACTIVITIES, WHAT ARE MY  RESPONSIBILITIES AND 
DUTIES TOWARDS HIM?  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
1314 
 
  
62. Fly unto Him for refuge with all your being, O Bharata; by 
His grace you shall obtain Supreme Peace (and) the Eternal 
Abode.  
Such an elaborate description has been given of the 
Spiritual Presence which vitalises the world-of-matter 
around man, only to bring about ultimately an 
evolutionary self-development  in the student. The very 
core of this Geeta-philosophy is the theme that is indicated 
in the opening stanza of the ' Ishaavasya Upanishad.' "The 
Infinite Truth pervades everything in the world, and 
therefore, renouncing all the multiplicity, enjoy the 
Infinitude, and covet not anybody's wealth."  
Recognition of the body throug h our abject identifications 
with it, creates a false sense of individuality, and it is this 
"ego" that suffers and sighs.  
The one commandment that has been repeated all through 
the Divine Song with great insistence is: "Renounce the 
ego and act." The ego is the cause for all our sense of 
imperfections and sorrows. To the extent we liquidate this 
sense of separateness and individuality, to that extent we 
climb into an experience of  greater perfection and joy 
within ourselves.  
Krishna has been advising surrender of the "ego" unto the 
Lord by developing a devote d attitude of dedication. 
Arjuna, like a true intelligent sceptic, asks: "To which Lord 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
1315 
 
should I renounce all my ac tion? --- and dedicate all my 
activities at which altar? Krishna has defined the Infinite 
Lord in the previous verse, and now, here He advises 
Arjuna to surrender his "ego" unto HIM. "FLY UNTO HIM 
FOR REFUGE WITH ALL YOUR WILL."  
Ours is an age of scepticism. The Arjuna of the Geeta is 
rather like a typical representati ve of our own age in this 
respect. A sceptic is one who questions the existing beliefs; 
he wants to be intellectua lly convinced of the logical 
grounds upon which the existing beliefs stand.  
Earlier, Krishna has explained to Arjuna what is indicated 
by the term Ishwara. Now the call of the Geeta to Arjuna is 
to surrender himself unto the Lord. The Geeta requires all 
of us to live and act with our hearts resting in self-
dedicated surrender to the Consciousness, the harmonious 
oneness of Life that pulsates everywhere through all 
equipments. In short, we are asked to identify ourselves 
with the Spirit rather than th e vehicles of Its expression. 
He who has thus surrendered totally ( Sarva-bhaavena) 
gains an intellect fully awakened, and thereafter, external 
circumstances cannot toss and crush his individuality.  
The body and mind of such an individual who has learnt 
ever to keep the refreshing memory of the present cannot 
make any foolish demands. And when one brings such a 
brilliant intellect into the affairs of life, all his problems 
wither away and carpet his path to strive progressively 
ahead.  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
1316 
 
To the extent we identify ou rselves with Him, to that 
extent His light and power become ours, and they are 
called "His Grace" ( Prasaada). Ere long, as a result of this 
"grace" accumulated within, through the integration of the 
personality and constant surrender of the ego, the 
individual shall obtain "THE SUPREME PEACE, THE 
ETERNAL RESTING PLACE."  
WITH ALL ONE'S BEING ( Sarva-bhaavena) --- This 
surrender unto the Lord should not be a temporary self-
deception. We must grow into a consciousness of the 
Presence of the Divine in all the planes of our existence. To 
illustrate such a total devotion , we have the examples of 
Radha, Hanuman, Prahlada, and others. Without bringing 
all the levels of our being,  and all the facets of our 
personality, into our love for Him, we cannot drown our 
finite ego-sense into the joyo us lap of the Infinite Lord. 
Thus, a true devotee must re-o rientate his being and must 
surrender himself as a willing vehicle for His expression. 
Then and then alone, all the delusions end, and the mortal 
gains divine experience, and comes to live fully the State 
of Immortality of the Godhood.  
IN CONCLUSION KRISHNA ADDS:  
  
63. Thus, the "Wisdom" which is a greater secret than all 
secrets, has been declared to you by Me; having reflected upon it 
fully, you now act as you choose.  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
1317 
 
This can be considered as THE CLOSING VERSE of the 
Geeta discourses on the battle-field of Kurukshetra. The 
word "thus" ( Iti) is generally used in Sanskrit to indicate 
what we mean nowadays, by the phrase "quotation 
closes." The Lord has ended His discourses here.  
A GREATER SECRET THAN ALL SECRETS ( Guhyaat-
Guhyataram) --- A secret can be so ca lled only as long as it 
is not divulged. The moment we come to know of a thing 
it is no longer a secret at all. The spiritual truth and the 
right way-of-living as discussed in the Geeta are termed as 
"THE SECRET OF ALL SECRETS"  in the sense that it is 
not easy for one to know th e Geeta way of dynamic life 
and the Geeta vision-of-Truth, unless one is initiated into 
them. Even a subtle intellect, very efficient in knowing the 
material world, both in its arrangement of things and their 
mutual interaction, must necessarily fail to feel the 
Presence of this Subtle, Eternal and Infinite Self.  
Guhyam --- This is a term that has gone into much misuse 
and abuse in India in our recent past. The term was 
misconstrued to mean that the spiritual knowledge, which 
is the core of our culture, is a great secret to be carefully 
preserved and jealously guarded by the privileged few 
against anybody else coming to learn it. This orthodox 
view has no sanction in the scriptures if we read them 
with the same large-heartedness of the Rishis who gave 
them to us. No doubt, there are persons who have not the 
intellectual vision, nor the mental steadiness, nor the 
physical discipline to understand correctly this great 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
1318 
 
Truth in all its subtle implications, and therefore, this is 
k e p t  a w a y  f r o m  t h e m  l e s t  t h e y  s h o u l d  c o m e  t o  h a r m  
themselves by falsely living a misunderstood philosophy.  
REFLECT OVER IT ALL --- Any amount of listening 
cannot make one gain in "wisdom." The knowledge 
gained through reading or listening must be assimilated 
and brought within the warp and the woof of our 
understanding; then alone can knowledge become 
wisdom. Therefore, Arjuna is asked not to tamely accept 
Krishna's Song of Life as trut h, but he has been asked to 
independently think over all that the Lord has declared. 
To put the ideas between the mind and the intellect and to 
chew them properly is "reflection." Each one will have to 
get his own individual confirmation from his own bosom.  
HEREAFTER ACT AS YOU PLEASE --- Krishna 
ultimately leaves the decision to act, the will to live the 
higher life, to Arjuna's own choice. Each one must reach 
the Lord by his own free choi ce. There is no compulsion; 
for, spontaneity is an invaluable requisite for all new 
births. Having placed before him all the facts and figures 
of life, principles and methods of living, Krishna rightly 
invites Arjuna to make his own independent decision after 
considering all these points. Spiritual teachers should 
never compel. And in India there has never been any form 
of indoctrination.  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
1319 
 
DEVOTION TO THE LORD IS THE SECRET OF 
SUCCESS IN " KARMA YOGA." THIS IS EXPLAINED IN 
THE FOLLOWING:  
  
64. Hear again My supreme word, most secret of all; because 
you are dearly beloved of Me, therefore, I will tell you what is 
good (for you) .  
When the Lord has concluded His entire discourse with 
the words, "THE WISDOM HAS BEEN DECLARED BY 
ME; NOW DO AS YOU PLEASE," Arjuna, who has been 
all along devotedly and attentively listening to the 
expounded philosophy, seems to register an expression of 
confusion on his face. Arjuna wants to get some more 
instructions. The Pandava Prince, perhaps, feels that he 
has not fully assimilated the deep and intimate 
philosophy of life as expounde d by the Lord. Therefore, 
Krishna continues, "AGAIN I WILL REPEAT THE 
PROFOUNDEST 'WISDOM'; PLEASE, ARJUNA, LISTEN 
ONCE AGAIN TO THIS SUPREME 'WISDOM'."  
The motive force behind every teacher coming out into the 
world to preach, to explai n and to expound, is his 
abundant love for mankind. Krishna repeats here the 
salient factors of his philosoph ical goal and the means of 
realising it, to Arjuna, "BECAUSE YOU ARE DEARLY 
BELOVED OF ME," meaning "YOU ARE MY FAST 
FRIEND." For this reason, Krishna tries to recapitulate his 
scheme of right living and noble endeavour in brief.  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
1320 
 
Arjuna is by temperament a soldier; and a soldier's 
intellect has no patience with a dialectical discourse. What 
he can best appreciate is only a cut-and-dried order 
shouted at him, and he has been trained by his vocation 
always to follow it implicitly. Arjuna is expecting Krishna 
to recast the whole philosoph y into a precise, definite, 
decisive commandment. Understanding this silent 
demand of the soldier's heart, Krishna promises here that 
He shall now declare the truth which is "the most secret of 
all" (Sarva-guhya-tamam).  
WHAT IS IT?  
  
65. Fix your mind upon Me; be de voted to Me; sacrifice for Me; 
bow down to Me; you shall come, surely then, to Me alone; truly 
do I promise to you, (for) you are dear to Me.  
Four conditions are laid down  for a successful seeker; and 
to those who have accomplished them all in themselves, 
an assurance of realisation, "YOU SHALL REACH ME," is 
given here. When a philosophy is summarised and 
enumerated in a few points, it has a deceptive look of 
utter simplicity, and a student is apt to take it lightly, or 
ignore it IN TOTO. In order to avoid such a mistake, the 
teacher invariably endorses his statement that it is indeed 
all Truth: I PROMISE YOU TRULY."  
To add a punch to this personal endorsement, Krishna 
guarantees the motive behind His discourses: "YOU ARE 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
1321 
 
DEAR TO ME." Love is the corre ct motive force behind all 
spiritual teachings. Unless a teacher has infinite love for 
the taught there is no inspired joy in teaching; a 
professional teacher is, at best, only a wage earner. He can 
neither inspire the student nor, while teaching, come to 
experience within himself the joyous ecstasy of 
satisfaction and fulfilment, which are the true rewards of 
teaching.  
A substantial part of the philosophy and the "path" 
declared herein have already been taught in an earlier 
chapter (IX-34). And the same thing is repeated here with 
the endorsement that what He is declaring is no pleasant 
compromise but the total unadulterated truth.  
WITH THE MIND FIXED ON ME --- Meaning "ever 
remembering Me, ever devotedly identifying with Me" 
through the process of dedicating all your activities unto 
Me, in an attitude of reverence unto the All-pervading 
Life, if you work in the service of the world, the promise is 
that you will reach the Supreme Goal.  
In all other religions the Goal is other than the Prophet; 
only in the Geeta the Supreme Himself is advising the 
seeker, and therefore He ha s to declare: "YOU WILL 
REACH ME."  
Looking up to Vaasudeva alon e as your aim, means and 
end, "you shall reach Me." Knowing that the Lord's 
declarations are true, and bein g convinced that liberation 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
1322 
 
is a necessary result of devo tion to the Lord, one should 
look up to the Lord as the highest and the sole refuge.  
The maladjusted "ego" in us has, by its own false concepts 
and imaginations, spooled us all up into cocoons of 
confusion and has tied us down with our own self-created 
shackles. Now, it is up to us to snap these cords that bind 
us and gain freedom from them all. The All-perfect 
Supreme has been as though shackled by our mind and 
intellect, and now the same mind and intellect must be 
utilised to unwind the binding cords. If we lock ourselves 
up in a room, it is left to us only to unlock its doors and 
walk out into freedom. Vaasanaas are created by our ego-
centric activities ( Sa-kaama-Karma) and by self-less work 
(Nish-kaama-Karma) alone can these vaasanaas be ended. 
Therefore, Krishna advises us: "Act on with mind fixed on 
Me. Devotedly work for Me. Dedicate all your activities as 
a sacrifice, as an offering unto Me."  
An attitude of reverence to the Supreme is necessary in 
order to re-incorporate into the texture of our own life, the 
qualities of the Supreme. Like water, knowledge also 
flows only from a higher to a lower level. Therefore, our 
minds must be in an attitude of surrender to Him in utter 
reverence and devotion.  
When you work in the worl d with such an attitude, 
Krishna says, "YOU SHALL REACH THE SUPREME."  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
1323 
 
ACCORDING TO SHANKARA, "HAVING TAUGHT, IN 
CONCLUSION, THAT THE SUPREME SECRET OF 
KARMA YOGA IS IN REGARDING THE LORD AS THE 
SOLE REFUGE, KRISHNA NOW PROCEEDS TO SPEAK 
OF THE INFINITE KNOWLEDGE, THE FRUIT OF 
KARMA YOGA, AS TAUGHT IN THE ESSENTIAL 
PORTIONS OF ALL THE UPANISHADS":  
  
66. Abandoning all DHARMAS, (of the body, mind, and 
intellect) , take refuge in Me alon e; I will liberate thee from all 
sins; grieve not.  
This is the noblest of all the stanzas in the Divine Song and 
this is yet the most controvers ial. Translators, reviewers, 
critics and commentators ha ve invested all their 
originality in commenting upon  this stanza, and various 
philosophers, each maintaining his own point of view, has 
ploughed the words to plan t his ideas into the ample 
bosom of this great verse of brilliant import. To Sri 
Ramanuja, this is the final verse ( Charama-Shloka) of the 
whole Geeta.  
Most often used, and yet in no two places having the same 
shade of suggestion, the term, 'Dharma'has become the 
very heart of the Hindu culture. This explains why the 
religion of India was called by the people who lived in the 
land and enjoyed its spiritual wealth as the ' Sanatana 
Dharma.'  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
1324 
 
Dharma, as used in our scriptures is, to put it directly and 
precisely, "THE LAW OF BEING." That because of which 
a THING continues to be the THING itself, without which 
the THING cannot continue to  be that THING, is the 
Dharma of the THING. Heat, because of which fire 
maintains itself as fire, without which fire can no more be 
fire, is the Dharma of fire. Heat is the Dharma of fire; cold 
fire we have yet to come across! Sweetness is the Dharma 
of sugar; sour sugar is a myth!  
Every object in the world has two types of properties: (a) 
the essential, and (b) the non-essential. A substance can 
remain itself, intact, when it s "non-essential" qualities are 
absent, but it cannot remain ever for a split moment 
without its "essential" property. The colour of the flame, 
the length and width of the to ngues of flame, are all the 
"non-essential" properties of fire, but the essential 
property of it is heat. This essential property of a 
substance is called its Dharma.  
Then what exactly is the Dharma of man? The colour of the 
skin, the innumerable endless varieties of emotions and 
thoughts --- the nature, the co nditions and the capacities 
of the body, mind and intellect  --- are the "non-essential" 
factors in the human personality, as against the Touch of 
Life, the Divine Consciousne ss, expressed through them 
all. Without the Atman man cannot exist; it is TRUTH 
which is the basis of existence. Therefore, the "essential 
Dharma" of man is the Divine Spark of Existence, the 
Infinite Lord.  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
1325 
 
With this understanding of the term Dharma, we shall 
appreciate its difference from mere ethical and moral rules 
of conduct, all duties in life, all duties towards relations, 
friends, community, nation and the world, all our 
obligations to our environment, all our affections, 
reverence, charity, and sense of goodwill --- all that have 
been considered as our Dharma in our books. In and 
through such actions, physical, mental and intellectual, a 
man will bring forth the expression of his true Dharma --- 
his Divine Status as the All-pervading Self. To live truly as 
the Atman, and to express Its Infinite Perfection through 
all our actions and in all our contacts with the outer world 
is to rediscover our Dharma.  
There are, no doubt, a few other stanzas in the Geeta 
wherein the Lord has almost directly commanded us to 
live a certain way-of-life, and has promised that if we obey 
His instructions, He will directly take the responsibility of 
guiding us towards HIS OWN BEING. But nowhere has 
the Lord so directly and openly expressed His divine 
willingness to undertake the service of His devotee as in 
this stanza.  
He wants the meditator to accomplish three distinct 
adjustments in his inner personality. They are: (1) 
Renounce all Dharmas throug h meditation; (2) surrender 
to My refuge alone; and while in the state of meditation, 
(3) stop all worries. And as  a reward Lord Krishna 
promises: "I SHALL RELEASE YOU FROM ALL SINS." 
This is a promise given to all mankind. The Geeta is a 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
1326 
 
universal scripture; it is the Bible of Man, the Koran of 
Humanity, the dynamic scripture of the Hindus.  
ABANDONING ALL DHARMA ( Sarva-Dharman 
Parityajya) --- As we have said above, Dharma is "the law 
of being," and we have already noted that nothing can 
continue its existence when once it is divorced from its 
Dharma. And yet, Krishna says, "COME TO MY REFUGE, 
AFTER RENOUNCING ALL DHARMAS." Does it then 
mean that our definition of Dharma is wrong? Or is there a 
contradiction in this stanza? Let us see.  
As a mortal, finite ego, the seeker is living, due to his 
identification with them, the Dharmas of his body, mind 
and intellect, and exists in life as a mere perceiver, feeler, 
and thinker. The perceiver-feeler -thinker personality in us 
is the "individuality" which expresses itself as the "ego." 
These are not our 'essential' Dharmas. And since these are 
the 'non-essentials,' "RENOUNCING ALL DHARMAS" 
means "ENDING THE EGO."  
"To renounce" therefore means "not to allow ourselves to 
fall again and again into this state of identification with 
the outer envelopments of matter around us." Extrovert 
tendencies of the mind are to be renounced. "Develop 
introspection diligently" is the deep suggestion in the 
phrase "RENOUNCING ALL DHARMAS."  
COME TO ME ALONE FOR SHELTER ( Mam-ekam 
Sharanam Vraja) --- Self-withdrawal from our extrovert 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
1327 
 
nature will be impossible unless the mind is given a 
positive method of developing its introvert attention. By 
single-pointed, steady contem plation upon Me, the Self, 
which is the One-without-a- second, we can successfully 
accomplish our total withdrawal from the misinterpreting 
equipments of the body, mind and intellect.  
Philosophers in India were neve r satisfied with a negative 
approach in their instructions; there are more DO's than 
DONTS with them. This practical nature of our 
philosophy, which is native to our traditions, is amply 
illustrated in this stanza wh en Lord Krishna commands 
His devotees to come to His shelter whereby they can 
accomplish the renunciation of all their false 
identifications.  
BE NOT GRIEVED (Maa shuchah) --- When both the above 
conditions are accomplished, the seeker reaches a state of 
growing tranquillity in meditation. But it will all be a 
waste if this subjective peace, created after so much 
labour, were not to form a st eady and firm platform for 
his personality to spring forth from, into the realms of the 
Divine Consciousness. The sp ring-board must stay under 
our feet, supply the required propulsion for our inward 
dive. But unfortunately, the very anxiety to reach the 
Infinite weakens the platform. Like a dream-bridge, it 
disappears at the withering touch of the anxieties in the 
meditator. During meditation, when the mind has been 
persuaded away from all its restless preoccupations with 
the outer vehicles, and brought, again and again, to 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
1328 
 
contemplate upon the Self, the Infinite, Lord Krishna 
wants the seeker to renoun ce all his "ANXIETIES TO 
REALISE." Even a desire to realise is a disturbing thought 
that can obstruct the final achievement.  
I SHALL RELEASE YOU FROM ALL SINS --- That which 
brings about agitations in the bosom and thereby causes 
dissipation of the energies is called "sin." The actions 
themselves can cause subtle exhaustions of the human 
power, as no action can be undertaken without bringing 
our mind and intellect into it. In short, the mind and 
intellect will always have to come and control every 
action. Actions thus leave their "foot prints," as it were, 
upon the mental stuff, and these marks which channelise 
the thought-flow and shape the psychological personality, 
when our mind has gone through its experiences, are 
called vasanas.  
Good vasanas bring forth a steady stream of good thoughts 
as efficiently as bad vasanas erupt bad thoughts. As long as 
thoughts are flowing, the mind  survives --- whether good 
or bad. To erase all vasanas completely is to stop all 
thoughts i. e. the total cessation of thought-flow viz. 
"mind." Transcending the mind-intellect-equipment is to 
reach the plane of Pure Consciousness, the Krishna-
Reality.  
As a seeker renounces more and more of his 
identifications with his ou ter envelopments through a 
process of steady contemplation and meditation upon the 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
1329 
 
Lord of his heart, he grows in his vision. In the newly 
awakened sensitive consciousn ess, he becomes more and 
more poignantly aware of the number of vasanas he has to 
exhaust. "BE NOT GRIEVED," assures the Lord, for, "I 
SHALL RELEASE YOU FROM ALL SINS" --- the 
disturbing, thought-gurgling, action-prompting, desire-
breeding, agitation-brewing vasanas, the "sins."  
The stanza is important inasmuch as it is one of the most 
powerfully worded verses in the Geeta wherein the Lord, 
the Infinite, personally undertakes to do something 
helpful for the seeker in case the spiritual hero in him is 
ready to offer his ardent co -operation and put forth his 
best efforts. All through the days of seeking, a Saadhaka 
can assure himself steady progress in spirituality only 
when he is able to keep within himself a salubrious mental 
climate of warm optimism. To despair and to weep, to feel 
dejected and disappointed, is to invite restlessness of the 
mind, and naturally, therefore, spiritual unfoldment is 
never in the offing. The stan za, in its deep imports and 
wafting suggestions, is indeed a peroration in itself of the 
entire philosophical poem.  
HAVING CONCLUDED THE ENTIRE DOCTRINE OF 
THE "GEETA- SHASTRA" IN THIS DISCOURSE, AND 
HAVING ALSO BRIEFLY AND CONCLUSIVELY 
RESTATED THE DOCTRINE IN ORDER TO IMPRESS IT 
MORE FIRMLY, THE LORD NOW PROCEEDS TO 
STATE THE RULE THAT SHOULD BE BORNE IN MIND 
WHILE IMPARTING THIS KNOWLEDGE TO OTHERS:  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
1330 
 
  
67. This is never to be spoken by you to one who is devoid of 
austerities or devotion, nor to  one who does no t render service, 
nor to one who desires not to listen, nor to one who cavils at Me.  
In almost all scriptural text s we find, in their closing 
stanzas, a description of the type of students to whom this 
knowledge can be imparted. Following faithfully this 
great tradition, here also we have this enumeration of the 
necessary qualifications for a true student of the Geeta. 
These are not so many fortresses raised round the 
treasure-house of the Geeta in order to protect some 
interests and provide some people with a kind of 
monopoly in trading upon th e wealth of ideas in these 
discourses. On the other hand, we shall find that these 
qualifications are essential adjustments in the inner 
personality of the student. And a bosom so tuned up is the 
right vehicle that can daringly invest that knowledge in 
living one's life and thus earn the joy-of-' wisdom.'  
THOSE WHO DO NOT LIVE AN AUSTERE LIFE --- 
Those who do not have any control over their body and 
mind; who have dissipated their physical and mental 
energies in the wrong direction and have thus become 
impotent bodily, mentally and intellectually --- to them 
"NEVER IS THIS TO BE SPOKEN BY YOU"; for, it will not 
be beneficial to them. There is  not a trace of prejudice in 
t h i s  s t a n z a .  I t  i s  e q u i v a l e n t  t o  s a y i n g  " p l e a s e  d o  n o t  s o w  
seeds upon rocks," for, the sower will never be able to 
reap, as nothing can grow on rocks.  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
1331 
 
THOSE WHO HAVE NO DEVOTION --- That is, those 
who do not have the capacity to identify themselves with 
the ideal that they want to reach. If one cannot sympathise 
with an ideal one can much less absorb or assimilate it. An 
ideal, however well understood intellectually, cannot 
yield its full benefit unless it is expressed in life. To hug on 
to the ideal, in a clasp of love, is devotion.  
THOSE WHO DO NOT RENDER SERVICE --- We have 
seen earlier, almost in all chapters, Krishna again and 
again insisting that selfless ac tivity is not only a means for 
the Saadhaka, but it is at once also the field where the 
perfect masters discover their fulfilment. Seekers who are 
not able to serve others, who are selfish, who have no 
human qualities, who have never felt a sympathetic love 
for others --- such persons are merely consumers and not 
producers of joy for others, and they invariably fail to 
understand or appreciate or come to live the joys of the 
Krishna way-of-life.  
THOSE WHO CAVIL AT ME --- Those who murmur 
against Me. If we do not respect and revere our teacher we 
can never learn from him. The first person singular used 
in the Geeta is identical with the Self, the Goal, and 
therefore, it means, "those who are not able to respect 
philosophy." Forceful conversion may enhance the 
numerical strength of a fait h, but self-development and 
inner unfoldment cannot come that way. Religion should 
not be forced upon anyone. One who has mentally 
rejected a philosophy can never, even when one has 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
1332 
 
understood it, live up to it. Therefore, those who are 
entertaining a secret disres pect for a philosophy should 
NOT BE FORCED to study it.  
Stanzas like this in a Shastra are meant as instructions for 
the students on how to attune themselves properly so that 
they can make a profitable study of the Shastra. None 
should expect an immediate re sult from his study of the 
Geeta. Personality readju stments cannot be made 
overnight. There is no miracle promised in the Geeta.  
Indirectly, the stanza also give s some sane instructions by 
its suggestions. If a student feels that he cannot 
satisfactorily understand the Geeta, he has only to sharpen 
his inner nature further by the above subjective processes. 
Just as we cleanse a mirror to remove the dimness of the 
reflection, so too, by prop erly readjusting the mind-
intellect-equipment, its sensitivity to absorb the Geeta-
philosophy can be increased.  
NOW THE LORD PROCEEDS TO STATE WHAT 
BENEFITS WILL ACCRUE TO HIM WHO HANDS 
DOWN HIS KNOWLEDGE TO OTHERS IN SOCIETY:  
  
68. He who, with supreme devotion to Me, will teach this 
supreme secret to My devotees, shall doubtless come to Me.  
The stanza under review and th e following one are both 
glorifications of a teacher who can give the correct 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
1333 
 
interpretation of the Geeta and make the listener follow 
the Krishna way-of-life. "Fight the evil down, whether it 
be within or without" is the cardinal principle that Krishna 
advocates to Prince Arjuna. In order to impart such a 
culture, it is not enough that the teacher be a mere scholar, 
but he must have the Kr ishna-ability. Hence the 
glorification. The Lord's Song has a special appeal to those 
who have the mysterious spiritual thirst to live a fuller 
and more dynamic life. Hence it is said: "This deeply 
profound philosophy" ( Paramam Guhyam) must be 
imparted to "My devotees" ( Mad-bhakteshu). Devotion to 
the Lord ( Bhakti) means the capacity to identify with the 
ideal, and therefore, the philosophy of the ideal way-of-
life can profitably be imparted  only to those persons who 
have a capacity to identify th emselves with the ideal and 
thereafter live up to it.  
It is not sufficient that the student alone has this capacity 
to identify himself with the higher ideal, but the teacher 
also must have ( Bhakti) "perfect attunement" with the 
Supreme Krishna-Reality. Such an individual, who is 
himself rooted in his attunement, and who tries to impart 
this knowledge to others and thereby constantly occupies 
himself in reflections upon th e philosophical ideals of the 
Geeta --- "shall certainly (Asamshayah) come to Me alone."  
An educated man should, in his gratitude, feel much 
indebted to the Muse-of-Wisdom. In fact, this 
indebtedness is actually called, in our tradition, Rishi-
indebtedness ( Rishi-Rinam), to absolve ourselves from 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
1334 
 
which, we are asked to study their works and preach their 
ideas everyday.  
Philosophy is the basis of every culture. The Hindu 
culture can revive and assert its glory only when it is 
nurtured and nourished by th e philosophy of India which 
is contained in the Upanishads. The fathers of our culture, 
the great Rishis, knowing this secret, urged the students of 
the Scriptures not to keep th is knowledge to themselves, 
but to impart it freely to others. In this way alone the 
culture can be successfully brought into the dim-lit 
chambers of people's lives.  
If a student, who has understood even a wee bit of our 
cultural tradition, does not convey it to others, it means 
that there is no mobility of intelligence or fluidity of 
inspiration in him. He who is  thus capable of conveying 
the truths of the Geeta to others is complimented here 
with the promise of the highest reward: "HE SHALL 
DOUBTLESS COME TO ME."  
NOT ONLY THIS, BUT THE LORD EXPRESSES THAT 
HE LOVES SUCH A TEACHER MUCH MORE THAN 
ANYBODY ELSE:  
  
69. Nor is there any among men who does dearer service to Me, 
nor shall there be another on earth dearer to Me than he.  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
1335 
 
Krishna again takes up, in this stanza, the glorification of 
the teacher who teaches the Geeta-knowledge. Herein, 
Krishna explains how such a man can reach Him easily, as 
declared in the previous verse. The Geetaacharya 
emphasises that such an indi vidual is "DEAREST TO MY 
HEART, AS I FIND NONE EQUAL TO HIM IN THE 
WORLD." Not only is there none to compare with him 
amongst the present generation, but there SHALL never 
be (Bhavita-Na-Cha) anyone, even in future times, so dear 
to Him, the Lord says, as su ch an individual who spends 
his time in spreading the knowledge of what little he has 
understood from the Geeta.  
Earlier, in the Geeta, a great psychological truth has been 
hinted at, which is often repeated throughout the entire 
length of the Divine Song, and this cardinal secret is that 
he who can bring his entire mind to the contemplation of 
the Divine, to the total exclusion of all dissimilar thought-
currents, will come to experience the Infinite Divine. A 
student of the Geeta who is sp ending his time in serious 
studies and in deep reflection upon them, and in 
preaching what he has understood, comes to revere the 
knowledge and thus reach an identification with an inner 
peace that is the essence of tr uth. Therefore, Krishna says: 
"THERE CAN NEVER BE ANY OTHER MAN MORE 
DEAR TO ME THAN SUCH A PREACHER; FOR, HE IS 
DOING THE GREATEST SERVICE TO ME BY 
EARNESTLY AND DEVOTEDLY TRYING TO CONVEY 
THE IMMORTAL PRINCIPLES EXPOUNDED IN THE 
GEETA."  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
1336 
 
It is not necessary in this context, that we must first 
ourselves become masters of the entire Geeta-Knowledge. 
Whatever one has understood one must immediately, 
with an anxious love, give out to those who are 
completely ignorant. Also , one must sincerely and 
honestly try to live the principles in one's own life --- 
"SUCH A MAN IS DEAREST TO ME."  
NOT ONLY THE PREACHER BUT EVEN THE SINCERE 
STUDENT IS CONGRATULATED IN THE FOLLOWING 
STANZA:  
  
70. And he who will study this sacred dialogue of ours, by him I 
shall have been worshipped by th e "sacrifice-of-wisdom, " such 
is My conviction.  
Having thus glorified all teac hers of the Geeta who carry 
the "Wisdom-of-the-sacred-discourse" to the masses, the 
Geeta, here, is glorifying even the students who are 
studying this Sacred text of  the Lord's Song. The great 
philosophy of life given out here as a conversation 
between Krishna --- the Infinite, and Arjuna --- the finite, 
has such a compelling charm about it, that even those who 
read it superficially will also be slowly dragged into the 
very sanctifying depths of it. Such an individual is, even 
unconsciously, egged on to make a pilgrimage to the 
greater possibilities within himself, and naturally, he 
comes to evolve through what Krishna terms here as 
"Jnaana Yajna."  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
1337 
 
In a Yajna, Lord Fire is invoked in the sacrificial trough 
and into it are offered oblations by the devotees. From this 
analogy, the term Jnaana Yajna has been originally coined 
and used in the Geeta. Study of the Scriptures and regular 
contemplation upon their deep  significances kindle the 
"Fire-of-Knowledge" in us an d into this the intelligent 
seeker offers, as his oblati on, his own false values and 
negative tendencies. This is the significance of the 
metaphorical phrase Jnaana Yajna. Therefore, here the 
Lord admits but a truth in the Spiritual science when He 
declares that those who stud y the Geeta --- contemplate 
upon its meaning, understand it thoroughly --- and those 
who can, at the altars of th eir well-kindled understanding, 
sacrifice their own ego-centric misconceptions about 
themselves, and about the world around them, are 
certainly the greatest devotees of the Infinite.  
When a rusted key is heated in  fire, the rust falls off and 
the key regains its original brightness. So too, our 
personality, when reacted with the knowledge of the 
Geeta, is chastened, since our wrong tendencies, 
unhealthy vasanas and false sense-of-ego which have risen 
from false-knowledge (Ajnaana), all get burnt up in Right-
Knowledge (Jnaana).  
AFTER THUS EXPLAINING  THE GLORY OF THE 
TEACHER AND THE BENEFITS OF THE STUDY SO 
FAR, KRISHNA INDICATES IN THE FOLLOWING 
STANZA, THAT EVEN "LISTENING" TO THE GEETA 
DISCOURSES IS BENEFICIAL:  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
1338 
 
  
71. That man also, who hears this, full of faith and free from 
malice, he too, liberated, shall attain to the happy worlds of those 
righteous deeds.  
A student of the Geeta cannot stand apart from his text 
book, and merely learn to appreciate the theme of the 
Lord's Song. An all-out, ardent wooing of the Geeta by the 
student at all levels is necessary, if the study of the Geeta 
is really to fulfil the student's spiritual unfoldment. 
Consequently, Krishna indicates here two conditions, 
fulfilling which alone can one profitably listen to the 
Geeta discourses and hope to gather a large dividend of 
joy and perfection.  
ONE OF FAITH ( Shraddhaavaan) --- The term Shraddhaa in 
Sanskrit, though usually translated as "faith," actually 
means much more than what it indicates in the English 
language and in the Western tradition. Shraddha has been 
defined as "that faculty in the human intellect which gives 
it the capacity to dive deep into and discover the subtler 
meaning of the scriptural declarations, and thus helps the 
individual to absorb that understanding into the warp and 
the woof of his own intellect."  
Therefore, that faculty in the intellect, (1) to understand 
the subtle import of the sacr ed words, (2) to absorb the 
same, (3) to assimilate, and (4) to make the student live up 
to those very same ideals, is Shraddhaa. Naturally, 
listening to the Lord's discourses can be fruitful only to 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
1339 
 
those who have developed this essential faculty in 
themselves.  
FREE FROM MALICE ( Anasooyah) --- They alone who are 
free from malice against the teachings of the Geeta can 
undertake, with a healthy attitude of mind, a deeper and 
detailed study of it. No doubt, Hinduism never asks any 
student to read and study a philosophy with an implicit 
and ready faith. But the human mind, as it is, will grow 
dull and unresponsive when it has idle prejudices against 
the very theme of its study.  
The intellect can receive the ideals preached in the Geeta 
only through the sense-organs, and these ideas must reach 
the intellect, filtered through the mind. If the mind 
contains any malice towards the very philosophy or the 
philosopher, the arguments and the goal indicated therein 
can never appeal to the studen t's intellect. No doubt, the 
student should bring in his own constructive criticism of 
an independent judgement upon what he studies, but he 
must be reasonably available to listen patiently to what 
the scripture has to say. In short, a student of religion 
must learn to keep an open  mind and not condemn the 
philosophy before understanding what it has to say.  
Such an individual who has attentively listened to the 
Geeta, who has intellectually absorbed, and assimilated 
the knowledge, "he too," says the Lord, "gets liberated" 
from the present state of confusions and sorrows, 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
1340 
 
entanglements and bondages in his personality, and 
reaches a state of inner tranquillity and happiness.  
JOY IS AN INSIDE JOB --- The kingdom of joy lies within 
all of us. Heaven is not so mewhere yonder; it is HERE 
AND NOW. Happiness and sorrow are both within us. To 
the extent we learn and live the principles of right living, 
as enunciated in the Geeta, to that extent, we shall come to 
gain a cultural eminence within ourselves and live an 
ampler life of greater achievements.  
It is the duty of a teacher to see that the student 
understands the great Goal and the 'path' completely. If 
the 'path' advised is found to  b e  i n a d e q u a t e  t o  b l e s s  t h e  
student, it is the duty of th e teacher to find out ways and 
means of making the student discover his own balance.  
HENCE IN THE FOLLOWING STANZA WE FIND 
KRISHNA ENQUIRING WHETHER ARJUNA HAS 
UNDERSTOOD WHAT HE HAS EXPOUNDED IN 
THESE EIGHTEEN CHAPTERS:  
  
72. Has this been heard, O son of  Pritha, with single-pointed 
mind? Has the distraction, caused by your 'ignorance, ' been 
dispelled, O Dhananjaya?  
Here, we find Lord Krishna, the teacher of the Geeta, 
putting a leading question to his disciple, Arjuna, giving 
him a chance to say how much  he has benefited from the 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
1341 
 
discourses. Of course, Krishna had no doubt about it; but 
it is only like a doctor, who, confident of his own achieved 
success, looks at the beaming face of the revived patient 
and enquires "how are you feeling now?" This is only to 
enjoy the beaming satisfaction that comes to play on the 
face of the relieved patient.  
HAVE YOU BEEN LISTENING WITH AN ATTENTIVE 
MIND? --- The very question implies that if you have been 
attentive you must have unde rstood sufficiently the logic 
in the things, beings an d happenings around, and 
therefore, your relationship with them also. The study of 
Vedanta broadens our vision, and we start RE-
COGNISING, in a new light, the same OLD SCHEME-OF-
THINGS around us, and then its previous ugliness gets 
lifted as though by magic.  
HAS YOUR DISTRACTION OF THOUGHT, CAUSED BY 
'IGNORANCE,' BEEN DISPELLED? --- The false values 
that we entertain distort our vision of the world and our 
judgement of its affairs. The delusion of mind was 
expressed by Arjuna in the opening chapters of the Geeta 
(I-36 to 46, and II-4 and 5).  
Amputating a septic toe to save  the body is no crime; on 
the contrary it is a life-giving blessing; it is not a toe 
destroyed, but it is a body and its life saved. The 
CULTURAL CRISIS of those times had egged the 
Kauravas on to rise up in arms against the beauty of the 
spiritual culture of the land. Arjuna was called upon by 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
1342 
 
the era to champion the caus e of the righteous. It was 
indeed a false reading of the situation that perverted the 
judgement of the Pandava Prince, as a consequence of 
which he became utterly broken down, and came to 
entertain a neurotic condition in himself. The fundamental 
cause of all confusions was his own "NON-
APPREHENSION OF REALITY" called in Vedanta 
philosophy as "ignorance" ( Ajnaana). When this 
"ignorance" is removed by the "APPREHENSION OF 
REALITY," termed as "knowledge" ( Jnaana), the entire by-
products of "ignorance" are all, in one sweep, eliminated. 
Hence the logic of this enquiry from the teacher.  
True "knowledge" expresses itself in one's own dexterity 
in action and it should fulfil itself in the splendour of its 
achievements in the service of society. In case Arjuna has 
understood the philosophy of the Geeta he will no more 
hesitate to meet the challenges as they reach him. This 
seems to be the unsaid idea in the heart of the Lord.  
ARJUNA CONFESSES THAT HIS CONFUSIONS HAVE 
ENDED:  
  
Arjuna said: 73. Destroyed is my delusion, as I have now gained 
my memory (knowledge) through your grace, O Achyuta. I am 
firm; my doubts are gone. I will do according to your word 
(bidding) .  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
1343 
 
Somewhat like one who has su ddenly awakened from an 
unconscious state, Arjun a, with a regained self-
recognition, assuredly confesses that his confusions have 
ended --- not because he has unquestioningly swallowed 
the arguments in the discourses of the Geeta, but because, 
as he himself says, "I have gained a RE-COGNITION of 
my Real Nature. The hero in me has now become 
awakened, and the neurotic condition that had 
temporarily conquered my mind has totally ended."  
Such a revival within and a rediscovery of our personality 
are possible for all of us if only we truly understand the 
significance of the Geeta philosophy. The Infinite nature of 
Perfection is our own. It is not something that we have to 
gain from somewhere by the intervention of some outer 
agency. This Mighty Being wi thin ourselves is now lying 
veiled beneath our own ego-cent ric confusions and abject 
fears. Even while we are con fused and confounded, and 
helplessly suffering the tragic sorrows of our ego, we are 
IN REALITY, none other th an our own Self. When the 
dream ends, the confusions al so end, and we awaken to 
our Real Nature. So too, in life. This awakening of the 
Divine in us is the ending of the beast within.  
In this new-found equilibrium , born out of Wisdom, he 
experiences an unshakable balance established upon firm 
foundations. All vacillations of the mind, doubts and 
despairs, dejections and hesitations, fears and weaknesses 
have left him (gata sandehah).  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
1344 
 
With such a revived personality, when Arjuna re-
evaluates the situation, he finds no difficulty at all in 
discovering what exactly his duty is. He openly declares, 
"I WILL DO ACCORDING TO YOUR WORD," for in the 
Geeta, Lord Krishna stands for the Divine-Spark-of-
Existence manifested as "pure-intelligence."  
All students --- who have thus fully understood the Geeta, 
have a clear picture of the goal-of-life, who know what 
'path' to follow and how to withdraw from the false by-
lanes of existence --- will surrender themselves, each to his 
own integrated inner persona lity. To surrender ourselves 
to our own "higher intellect" and to declare confidently 
and with faith, "I SHALL DO THY BIDDING," is the 
beginning and the end of all spiritual life.  
SANJAYA GLORIFIES THE GEETAACHARYA AND HIS 
DIVINE SONG, THE GEETA:  
  
Sanjaya said: 74. Thus have I heard this wonderful dialogue 
between Vaasudeva and the high-souled Paartha, which causes 
the hair to stand on end.  
In the previous stanza, when  one carefully understands 
the full significance of the assertion made by the 
rediscovered, and therefore, revived Arjuna, one cannot 
avoid remembering a parallel declaration made by 
another teacher of the world,  when he revived from his 
temporary confusion (Arjuna-sthiti). When he regained his 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
1345 
 
spiritual balance, which he, as it were, lost temporarily 
while carrying the cross through the taunting crowd, Jesus 
also cried: THY WILL BE D ONE." Here Arjuna, revived 
by the Grace of Krishna, similarly cries, "I shall act 
according to your word (Karishye Vachanam Tava)." In both 
cases we find that the statements are almost identical.  
Earlier, at the opening of the Geeta, the Pandava Prince 
said to Govinda: "I SHALL NOT FIGHT," and became 
despondent; it is the same Arjuna, now entirely revived 
and fully rehabilitated, who declares: "I shall abide by Thy 
will." The cure is complete and with this the Shastra also 
ends.  
THUS HAVE I HEARD THIS DIALOGUE BETWEEN 
VAASUDEVA AND THE HIGH-SOULED ARJUNA --- In 
the context of the Vyasa-literature, the conversation 
between Vaasudeva, Lord Krishna, and the son of Prithaa, 
Arjuna,  
is but a silent mystic dialog ue between the "higher" and 
the "lower" in man, the "Spirit" and the "Matter." 
Vaasudeva means the Lord ( Deva) of the Vasus; the eight 
Vasus (Ashta-vasu) together preside over Time. Therefore, 
Vaasudeva, in its mystic sy mbolism, stands for the 
Consciousness that illumines the "concept of Time" 
projected by the intellect of man. In short, Vaasudeva is 
the Atman, the Self. Paartha represents matter (earth) 
which is capable of shedding itself, sheath by sheath to 
emerge as the pure Eternal Spir it, the Supreme. This act of 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
1346 
 
understanding himself as different from his matter 
vestures is man's highest art, the Art of unveiling the 
Infinite through the finite. The technique of this art is the 
theme of the Geeta.  
WONDERFUL ( Adbhutam) --- This philosophy of the 
Geeta, listened to so far by Sanjaya, is reviewed by him as 
"miraculous," as "wonderful." Every philosophy, no doubt, 
is a marvel of man's intellect and represents its subtle 
visions and powers of comprehension. But the philosophy 
of the Geeta was indeed a shade more marvellous and 
wonderful to Sanjaya, because, it revived the BLASTED 
personality of Arjuna into  a DYNAMIC WHOLE. Because 
of this practical demonstratio n of its powers to bless man, 
the Geeta philosophy has acquired the marvellous lustre 
of the rare.  
It has proved, beyond all doubt, that every average 
human being is endowed with potential power with 
which he can easily conquer all the expressions of life in 
him and command them to manifest exactly as he wants. 
He is the Lord of his life, th e master of the vehicles, and 
not a victim of some other mightier power that has created 
him, only to be endlessly te ased by the whims and fancies 
of his own body, mind and intellect. When this truth is 
revealed, it is but human for Sanjaya, in ecstacy, to 
exclaim: "Oh! what a marvellous revelation! What a 
stupendous demonstration!! Adbhutam!!!"  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
1347 
 
HIGH-SOULED PAARTHA --- In the stanza Arjuna has 
been glorified and not Lord Krishna, the Parthaasaarathi. 
The Pandava Prince, Arjuna, had the courage and heroism 
to come out of his mental confusions, when he gained the 
right knowledge from his Master's teachings. Certain acts 
of a child call forth our admiration, but the same acts 
performed by a grown-up person, look perhaps ridiculous 
and childish. To the omnipote nt Lord, the declaration of 
the whole Geeta itself is but a love-play. But, for the 
confused Arjuna to understand the philosophy, and 
heroically walk out of his confusions is indeed an 
achievement, worthy of appr eciation. Thus Krishna, the 
All-perfect, is almost ignored, but Arjuna, the mortal, who 
has understood the art of living as expounded in the 
Geeta, and has actually revived himself by living it, is 
heartily congratulated and glorified!  
Sanjaya's sympathies were with the Pandavas; but as an 
employed minister, he was eating the salt of 
Dhritarashtra, and it was not Dharma for him to be 
disloyal to his master. At the same time, in the context of 
the politics of that time, Dhritarashtra was, perhaps, the 
only one who, even then , could stop the war. 
Diplomatically, Sanjaya tries his best, in these stanzas, to 
bring into the blind man's heart the suggestion of a peace 
treaty. He makes the blind king understand that Lord 
Krishna has revived and re-awakened the hero in Arjuna. 
The blind king is reminded of what the consequences 
would be: the death and disaster to his hundred children, 
the pangs of separation in his old age, the dishonour of it 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
1348 
 
all --- all these are brought home to Dhritarashtra. But the 
tottering king's "blindness" seems to be not only physical 
but also mental and intellectual, for Sanjaya's beseeching 
moral suggestions fall on the deaf ears of the blind elder.  
SANJAYA OPENLY ACKNOWLEDGES HIS INDEBTED-
NESS TO SHRI VEDA-VYASA:  
  
75. Through the grace of Vyasa I have heard, this supreme and 
most secret YOGA , directly from Krishna, the Lord of YOGA, 
Himself declaring it.  
Before the great battle started, Vyasa had approached 
Dhritarashtra to offer him the "power of vision" to witness 
the war; however, the weak-hearted king had not the 
courage to accept the offer. The king had then suggested 
that if this power could be given to Sanjaya, the king 
could, through the faithful minister, listen to a running 
commentary of what was happening on the Kurukshetra 
battle-field. It was thus from Vyasa that Sanjaya, sitting in 
the carpeted chambers of the Kaurava palace, gained the 
special faculty of witnessing all that happened and 
listening to all that was said at the distant battle-field. 
Grateful to Shri Veda-Vyasa  for having given him this 
wonderful chance of listening to this "Supreme and most 
profound Yoga," Sanjaya is mentally prostrating to the 
incomparable poet-sage, the author of the Mahabharata.  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
1349 
 
DIRECTLY FROM KRISHNA HIMSELF ( Yogeshwarat 
Krishnat) --- The suggestion is NOT that Sanjaya had never 
heard the philosophy of the Upanishads ever before, and 
that the novelty of the revelation had stunned him; but 
that his joy is due to the fact that he got a chance to listen 
to the Eternal Knowledge of the Upanishads directly from 
the Lord-of-all- Yogas, Shri Krishna Himself ( Saakshaat), 
from His own sacred lips.  
Here also we can see how Sanjaya is sincerely trying to 
make the blind Dhritarashtra realise that it is not Krishna, 
the son of Devaki, nor the cowh erd boy, but it is the Lord 
Himself the Yogeshwarah who has revived Arjuna, and 
who is serving His devotee as his charioteer. The blind 
king is reminded that his children, though they have 
marshalled a large army, stan d doomed to destruction, 
since they have to face the Infinite Lord Himself in their 
enemy ranks.  
THE DEEP IMPRESSION CREATED BY THIS 
IRRESISTIBLE PHILOSOPHY ON THE DEVOTED 
HEART OF SANJAYA IS VIVIDLY PAINTED:  
  
76. O King, remembering this wonderful and holy dialogue 
between Keshava and Arjuna, I rejoice again and again.  
Herein we have a clear statemen t of Sanjaya's reactions to 
his listening to the Lord's Song. He says, "THIS 
DISCOURSE BETWEEN KRISHNA AND ARJUNA"-
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
1350 
 
between God and man, betw een the Perfect and the 
imperfect, between the "highe r" and the "lower" --- is at 
once "WONDERFUL AND HOLY."  
The vision and impression cr eated in his heart by the 
philosophy that was heard are so deep and striking, that 
Sanjaya admits how irresistibly the memory of those 
words rises up again and agai n in his bosom, giving him 
"the thrill of joy" (Harsham).  
Indirectly, Vyasa is prescribing the method of study of the 
Geeta. It being "a handbook of instruction" on the Art of 
Living, it has TO BE READ AGAIN AND AGAIN, 
REPEATEDLY REFLECTED UPON AND 
CONTINUOUSLY REMEMBERED, until the inner man in 
us is completely re-educated in the way-of-life that the 
Geeta charts out  
for man. The reward for such  a painstaking study, and 
consistency of application ha s also been clearly pointed 
out.  
One rejoices when one comes to recognise a definite 
purpose in the otherwise purposeless pilgrimage of man, 
from the womb to the tomb, called 'life.' The study of the 
Geeta gives not only a purpose to our every-day existence 
but also a positive message of hope and cheer to the 
world. The Geeta picks us up from the by-lanes of life and 
enthrones us as the sovereign power that rules, commands 
and orders our own life within.  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
1351 
 
Thus the Geeta is an infinite fountain-head of inspiration 
and joy. It provides our mind with a systematic scheme of 
re-education whereby it can discover a secret power in 
itself to tackle intelligently the chaotic happenings around 
us which constitute our world of challenges. The Geeta-
educated man learns to RECOGNISE A RHYTHM, to SEE 
A BEAUTY, and to HEAR A MELODY in the ordinary 
day-to-day life --- a life which was till then but a mad 
death-dance of appearances and disappearances of things 
and beings.  
SANJAYA CONFESSES THAT NOT ONLY DOES THE 
PHILOSOPHY ENCHANT HIS MIND, BUT EVEN THE 
MEMORY OF THE LORD'S WONDROUS FORM AS THE 
TOTAL MANIFESTED UNIVERSE HAS A MAGIC OF 
ITS OWN WHICH WARMS UP HIS HEART:  
  
77. Remembering and again rememb ering, that most wonderful 
Form of Hari, great is my wond er, O king; and I rejoice again 
and again.  
AS I OFTEN REMEMBER REPEATEDLY THAT MOST 
WONDERFUL FORM OF HARI --- Lord Krishna, the 
charioteer, gave the vision of His Cosmic-Form 
(Vishwaroopa) in an earlier chapter; it is that Form that is 
indicated by Sanjaya here. The Cosmic-Form of the Lord is 
an impressive to the man-o f-heart, as the philosophy of 
the Geeta is unforgettable to the man-of-intelligence. The 
concept of the Lord's "Total-Form" is staggering in the 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
1352 
 
Vedas, and no doubt, highly impressive in the Geeta. But it 
need not necessarily be a mere poetic vision of the great 
Vyasa; there are many others whose experiences are 
almost parallel.  
If the philosophy of the Geeta, as it reveals to us the 
glorious purpose in life, insp ires and thrills the thinking 
aspect in man, the vision of the smiling Lord of 
Vrindavana BEHIND EVERY NAME AND FORM, 
BENEATH EVERY EXPERIENCE, UNDER EVERY 
SITUATION, adds a life-giving joy and a maddening 
ecstasy to the drunken heart  
of love.  
Given the freedom, I suppose, Sanjaya would have written 
a full length Sanjaya-song on the Lord's Divine Song! 
When the head is thrilled with the silence of under-
standing, and the heart is intoxicated with the embrace of 
love, man gets transported into a sense of inspired 
fulfilment.  
TO EXPRESS THAT SATISF ACTION, LANGUAGE IS A 
FRAIL VEHICLE; THEREFORE, WITHOUT DILATING 
MUCH UPON WHAT IS UPPERMOST IN HIS MIND, 
SANJAYA SUMMARISES THEM ALL INTO A 
DECLARATION OF HIS BURNING FAITH, IN THIS 
CONCLUDING STANZA OF THE BHAGAWAD GEETA:  
  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
1353 
 
78. Wherever is Krishna, the Lord of YOGA , wherever is 
Paartha, the archer, there are pr osperity, victory, happiness and 
firm (steady or sound) policy; this is my conviction.  
This is the closing stanza of SRIMAD BHAGAWAD 
GEETA, which contains altogether seven hundred and 
one verses. This concluding verse has not been sufficiently 
thought over and commented upon by the majority of 
commentators of the Geeta. The superficial word-meaning 
of the verse, in fact, can only impress any intelligent 
student, at its best, as rather drab and dry. After all 
Sanjaya is expressing his priv ate faith in and his personal 
opinion about something which the readers of Geeta need 
not necessarily accept as final. Sanjaya, in effect, says: 
"Where there is Krishna, the Lord of Yoga, and Arjuna, 
ready with his bow, there prosperity ( Sree), success 
(Vijaya), expansion ( Bhooti), and sound policy ( Dhruva-
neeti) will be; this is my sure faith."  
After all, a student of the Geeta is not interested in 
Sanjaya's opinion, and it almost amounts to a foul and 
secret indoctrination, if Sanj aya means, diplomatically, to 
inject into us his own person al opinion. The Geeta, as a 
"Universal Scripture" would have fallen from its own 
intrinsic dignity as "the Bible of man" had this stanza no 
Eternal Truth to suggest, which readily invokes a 
universal appeal.  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
1354 
 
The perfect artist, Vyasa, coul d never have made such a 
mistake; indeed, there is a deep er significance in which an 
unquestionable truth has been expounded.  
KRISHNA, THE LORD OF YOGA (Yogeshwarah Krishnah) -
-- All through the Geeta, Krishn a represented the Self, the 
Atman. This spiritual core is the Ground upon which the 
entire play of happenings is staged. He can be invoked 
within the bosom of each one of us through any one of the 
Yoga-techniques expounded in the Geeta.  
ARJUNA, READY WITH HIS BOW ( Paartho-
Dhanurdharah) --- Paartha represents, in this text book, "the 
confused, limited, ordinary mortal, with all his 
innumerable weaknesses, agitations and fears." When he 
has thrown down his "instrument" of effort and 
achievement, his bow, and has reclined to impotent 
idleness, no doubt, there is no hope for any success or 
prosperity. But when he is "READY WITH HIS BOW," 
when he is no more idle but has a willing readiness to use 
his faculties to brave the challenges of life, there, in that 
man, we recognise a "PAARTHA READY WITH HIS 
BOW."  
Now putting these two pictures together --- Lord Krishna, 
the Yogeshwarah, and Arjuna, the Dhanurdharah --- the 
symbolism of a way-of-life gets completed, wherein, 
reinforced with spiritual understanding, man gets ready 
to exert and pour in his endevours, to tame life and master 
prosperity. In such a case, there is no power that can stop 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
1355 
 
him from success. In short, the creed of the Geeta is that 
spirituality CAN be lived in  life, and true spiritual 
understanding is an asset to a man engaged in the battle-
of-life.  
Today's confusions in society and man's helpless 
insignificance against the flood  of events --- inspite of all 
his achievements in science and mastery over matter --- 
are seen, because the Yogeshwarah in him is lying 
neglected, uninvoked. A happy blending of the sacred and 
the secular is the policy for man as advised in the Geeta. 
In the vision of Sri Veda-Vya sa, he sees a world-order in 
which man pursues a way-of-life, wherein the spiritual 
and the material values are happily wedded to each other. 
Mere material production can, no doubt, bring 
immediately a spectacular flood of wealth into the pockets 
of man, but not peace and joy into his heart. PROSPERITY 
WITHOUT PEACE WITHIN IS A CALAMITY, 
GRUESOME AND TERRIBLE!  
The stanza at the same time refuses to accept the other 
extreme; Yogeshwarah Krishna could have achieved 
nothing on the battle-field of Kurukshetra without the 
Pandava Prince, Arjuna, "ARMED AND READY TO 
FIGHT." Mere spirituality without material exertion and 
secular achievements will not make life dynamic. I have 
been trying my best to bring out, as clearly as I can, this 
running vein of thought throughout the Geeta, which 
expounds the PHILOSOPHY OF HARMONY and 
explains its plan for man's enduring happiness.  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
1356 
 
Krishna, in the Geeta, stands for the MARRIAGE 
BETWEEN THE SECULAR AND THE SACRED. 
Naturally, it is the ardent faith of Sanjaya that when a 
community or nation has its masses galvanized to endure, 
to act, and to achieve (Paarth a, the bow-man) and if that 
generation is conscious of and has sufficiently invoked the 
spiritual purity of head and heart in themselves (Krishna, 
the Lord-of- Yoga), in that generation, prosperity, success, 
expansion, and a sound and sane policy become the 
natural order.  
Even in the arrangement of these terms --- prosperity, 
success, expansion and sound policy --- there is an under-
current of logic which is evident to all students of world 
history. In the context of mo dern times and the political 
experiences, we know that without an intelligent and 
STEADY POLICY, no government can lead a nation to any 
substantial achievement. With a sound policy, 
EXPANSION of all the dormant faculties in the 
community is brought out, and then only the spirit of co-
ordination and brotherhood in the fields of achievement 
comes to play. In this healthy spirit of love and 
cooperation, when a disciplined people work hard, and 
when their efforts are intelligently channelised by the 
sound policies of the gove rnment, SUCCESS cannot be far 
away. Success thus earned, as a result of national 
endeavour, disciplined and channelised by a firm, 
intelligent policy, should necessarily yield true 
PROSPERITY. A saner philosoph y we cannot find even in 
modern political thought!!  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
1357 
 
Enduring prosperity must be that which arises from 
successful endeavour, that is th e result of cooperative and 
loving effort and this cannot yield any success unless it is 
nurtured and nourished, guarded and protected, by an 
intelligent and sound policy.  
It now becomes quite clear that it is not only Sanjaya's 
faith, but it is the ardent conviction of all men of self-
control and disciplined mind ( Sanjayas), trained to think 
independently.  
There are some commentators of the Geeta, who draw our 
attention to this concluding word in the Geeta, "my" 
(mama), and to the opening word  in the Geeta, "Dharma." 
Between these two words the seven hundred stanzas are 
hung together as a garland of immortal beauty, and so 
these commentators summarize  the meaning of the Geeta 
as "MY Dharma" ( Mama Dharma). The Geeta explains the 
nature of man, MY Dharma, and the nature of Truth, MY 
Dharma and how the true life starts when these two are in 
harmony and come to play in  one single individual. The 
ideal nature of all true students of the Geeta, therefore, 
should be a glorious synthesis of both the SPIRITUAL 
KNOWLEDGE expressed in their equipoise and character, 
and the DYNAMIC LOVE expressed through their service 
to mankind and their readiness to sacrifice.  
Thus, in the  UPANISHADS of the glorious Bhagawad-Geeta, 
in the Science of the Eternal, in the scripture of  YOGA , in the 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
1358 
 
dialogue between Sri Krishn a and Arjuna, the eighteenth 
discourse ends entitled:  
THE YOGA OF LIBERATION THROUGH 
RENUNCIATION 
The closing chapter is entitled as Liberation through 
Renunciation ( Moksha-samnyasa-Yoga). This term is very 
closely reminiscent of the Asparsa-Yoga of the Upanishads, 
and the definition of Yoga as given by Krishna Himself in 
an earlier chapter To renounce the false values of life in us 
is at once to rediscover the Divine nature in each one of us 
which is the essential heritage of man. To discard the beast 
in us ( Samnyasa), is the Liberation ( Moksha) of the Divine 
in us.  
OM TAT SAT 
MAMA SADGURU TAPOVANA CHARANAYOH 
"At The Feet Of My Master Tapovanam." 
Om Om Om Om Om 