Chapter 7
Jnana Vijnana Yoga 
 
The Yoga of Wisdom and knowledge 
 
The Blessed Lord said: 1. With the mind intent on Me, Partha, 
practising YOGA and taking refuge in Me, how thou shalt, 
without doubt, know Me fully, that do thou hear.  
It would be, naturally, the doubt of all seekers, especially 
before they enter the seat of meditation, as to how it is 
possible for a limited mind to  understand or embrace the 
unlimited. This doubt can come to such seekers, who try 
only for intellectual appreciation of the philosophy of 
Vedanta; but all seekers could only be, in the beginning, 
mere scholarly students of the Vedantic literature. This is 
an unavoidable state in th e Path of knowledge. The 
Science of Vedanta exhaustively deals with this problem 
and tries to explain how the mind, when made to meditate 
upon the Infinite, comes to transcend its own limitations 
and comes to experience the Infinite.  
Here Krishna, introducing the theme to be dealt with in 
the next six chapters, assures Arjuna that He would 
explain the entire science and technique, which will 
clearly show how a meditator, by fixing his integrated 
mind upon the contemplation of the NATURE of the Self, 
can come to experience the Divine. From this chapter 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
504 
 
onwards the term 'mind' is to be understood, not as a 
debilitated and disintegrated mind, but as an integrated 
mind properly tutored to walk, implicitly obeying the will 
of the discriminative intellect. When such a mind is firmly 
established in full concentration upon the divine nature of 
its Godly potentialities, the s eeker evolves double quick. 
The logic of this inward development, it is promised, will 
be the theme of this section.  
NOW LISTEN TO WHAT I AM GOING TO SAY AS TO 
HOW YOU ALSO, THUS ACTING, WILL, WITHOUT 
DOUBT, KNOW ME IN FULL, POSSESSED OF INFINITE 
GREATNESS, STRENGTH , GRACE AND OTHER 
APPARENT ATTRIBUTES:  
  
2. I shall declare to thee in full  this knowledge combined with 
realisation, which being known, nothing more here remains to 
be known.  
According to Shankara, speculative knowledge is Jnana, 
and actual experience of the perfection is Vijnana. Here 
Krishna is promising that he would not only deliver to 
Arjuna the theoretical explanation of the Art of Divine 
Life, but also, during the very discourse, take him to the 
highest peak of Self-rediscovery. This may look rather 
unbelievable but unlike Yoga and other types of 
philosophies in India, Vedanta is not an indirect process, 
inasmuch as, after the study of this Shastra, it is not 
necessary for A FIT STUDENT to retire into the jungles to 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
505 
 
practise and bring the experience of perfection into his 
cognition.  
During the very discourse, if the student is mentally fit to 
walk along with the teache r step by step and follow 
carefully the logic and significance of his explanations, he 
can gain glimpses of realisat ion during the very hours of 
his study. It is because of this that Vedanta is taught only 
to a student who has been made fit for this flight to the 
beyond. If an individual student is perfectly integrated 
inwardly and if he can continuously maintain his 
adventurous thirst to experience the Reality, then he, in 
his attempt to identify himself with the thought and the 
spirit of his teacher's discourses, can ultimately come to 
revel in the experience of the very goal that is indicated by 
Vedanta. Self-realisation is instantaneous, during the study 
and understanding of scriptures, gained through the 
teacher-taught discussions.  
IF VEDANTA IS THUS A COMPLETE SCIENCE, AND 
THE EXPERIENCE OF THE DIVINITY OF THE SELF 
CAN BE HAD EVEN DURING  THE VERY TEACHER-
TAUGHT DISCUSSIONS, HOW IS IT THAT SELF-
REALISED MASTERS ARE SO  RARE IN THE WORLD? 
LISTEN:  
3. Among thousands of men, one perchance strives, for 
perfection; even among those successful strivers, only one 
perchance knows Me in essence.  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
506 
 
The idea that Vedantic realisation and knowledge can 
come into the experience of only a rare few has been 
repeatedly emphasised in diffe rent portions of spiritual 
literature in India, by differe nt Masters, in different 
expressions. We were told pr eviously (II-29) how the very 
theoretical side of Vedanta is heard and understood as 
marvel. In the Upanishads also, the same idea has been 
very clearly expressed by the Rishis.  
Here, however, Krishna shifts the entire responsibility for 
not realising the Self upon the individual seeker himself 
and attributes it entirely to the sadhaka's lack of self-
application. Vedanta being a subjective science, it is not 
sufficient that we know how to eradicate our weaknesses 
and cultivate our inward strength, but we must also live 
up to those ideals and try to bring about the necessary re-
adjustments in ourselves. Very few can discover in 
themselves this necessary urge to evolve.  
Of the thousands that hear intelligently, and perhaps 
understand all the theory and text of Vedanta, only a few 
sincerely apply themselves to live fully the Vedantic way-
of-life. Even among a thousand such sincere seekers, only 
a rare-few "COME TO KNOW ME AND MY REAL 
NATURE."  
The chances are that when this Vedantic way of life is 
perfectly explained by a Sad-Guru to a student, who is 
seemingly attending with all enthusiasm, with sincerity 
and concentration, he may raise himself up to, perhaps, 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
507 
 
the very gates of Truth, but there, he himself may come to 
bar his own entry into the sanctum 'within.' There, some 
imperceptible vanity, or unsuspected desire, is sufficient 
to exile him from himself. In this sense, there is a wealth of 
meaning in Lord Christ's declaration that a camel can pass 
through the eye-of-a-needle more  easily then a "rich" man 
through the gates of heaven --- the RICHES here are not 
the 'worldly wealth,' but the individual's mental vasana-
wealth. Unless the mind is perfectly naked, it has no entry 
into the Bliss of Truth.  
Viewing the stanza in the ligh t of the Krishna-spirit, it 
only means that rare indeed are people who come to 
study sincerely and get a true glimpse of the Vedanta-
literature, and only a low percentage of these again can 
discover in themselves the necessary mental stamina, the 
intellectual vision and the physical forbearance to live that 
life of truth and purity in the world. Since Arjuna and all 
the students of the Geeta are such rare souls, they 
represent the community of evolvers. To them Krishna 
promises that He can, through His Divine Song, not only 
deliver the speculative part of the philosophy of Vedanta 
but also practically hand over chances to live subjectively 
the vital moments of vivid inner experience of the Self.  
HAVING PREPARED THE HEARER FOR THE 
TEACHING, BY INDUCING IN HIM A TASTE FOR IT, 
THE LORD PROCEEDS THUS:  
  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
508 
 
4. Earth, water, fire, air, ether,  mind, intellect, egoism --- these 
are My eight-fold PRAKRITI.  
In an attempt to explain the world outside as a marriage 
between matter and spirit, great thinkers of the Vedic 
period had exercised their ph ilosophical acumen and had 
given us the Sankhyan Philosophy. According to them, the 
Spiritual Factor ( Purusha) presiding over a given matter 
envelopment, dynamises the inert matter and makes the 
insentient mineral assembly to act, as though it is 
intelligent and vital. This idea  becomes clear to us when 
we take an example from the modern world.  
With steel and iron, the man ufacturer completes a steam-
engine and when the cold engine is harnessed to steam, at 
high pressure, it does work. Steam by itself can never 
express its dynamic capacity and strength; on the other 
hand, when it is made to work through a given 
equipment, it is capable of adding motion and 
performance to the inert iron assemblage.  
Thus, one of the schools of philosophy in India tries to 
explain scientifically, how the Eternal and the Perfect Self 
comes to express Itself as the world-of-plurality, in the 
embrace of matter. This also explains the relationship 
between Spirit and matter. The technical terms used in the 
philosophy for those two items are: Prakriti, for the 
"matter-envelopments," and Purusha for the "Spirit-factor."  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
509 
 
Krishna explains in this and the following stanza, all the 
items that together constitute the matter and those that 
constitute the Spiritual Entity within a living man. Once 
the individual comes to unders tand clearly the distinction 
between matter and Spirit he will indeed come to 
understand that the Spirit identifying with matter, is the 
cause for all Its sufferings and when It is detached from Its 
identifications, it rediscovere s for itself its own essential 
nature as Perfection and Bliss Absolute. The spirit 
identifying with matter, and sharing the destinies of the 
inert equipment, is called the "ego" ( Jeeva). It is the "ego" 
that comes to rediscover itself to be nothing other than the 
Spirit that presides over matter.  
In order to make Arjuna realise how exactly one is to 
understand the true nature of  the Self, in all Its divine 
might and glory, Lord Krishna tries to enumerate the 
matter-aspect, as distinct from the Spiritual-Truth in each 
individual.  
The five great elements, mind, intellect and ego constitute, 
according to the Geeta, the eight-fold Prakriti that has 
come to be superimposed  upon the Truth through 
ignorance. The five great cosmic elements are represented 
in the microcosm by the five sense-organs by which the 
individual comes to experien ce and live in the world of 
sense-objects. Thus, the list making up Prakriti is nothing 
other than the subtle body an d its vehicles of expression 
are constituted of the sense-organs. The sense-organs are 
the channels through which th e world of stimuli reaches 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
510 
 
within, and the inner point of focus of the five sense-
organs is called the "mind". The impulses received by the 
mind are rationally classified and systematised into the 
knowledge of their perception by the intellect. At all these 
three levels of sense perception, mental reception, and 
intellectual assimilation, there is a continuous sense of I-
ness, which is called the "ego". These constitute the 
equipments through which, at the touch of Life, man 
functions as the intelligent being that he is.  
WHAT THEN IS YOUR HIGHER NATURE? LISTEN:  
  
5. This is the "lower" PRAKRITI; different from it, know thou, 
O mighty-armed, My "Higher' ' PRAKRITI , the very Life-
element, by which this world is upheld.  
After enumerating in the above stanza the "lower" nature 
of the Self, Krishna says that this is not all. The Self 
possesses, besides these equipments, a Higher-Nature 
which is constituted of Pure Consciousness, or Awareness. 
It is this Spiritual Entity that makes it possible for the 
body, mind and intellect, made  up of mere inert minerals, 
to act as if they were in them selves so vitally sentient and 
intelligent.  
The Spiritual Factor is the entity by whose contact the 
equipments function, and without which the equipments 
become dull and insentient. If  Consciousness were not in 
us, we would not be able to experience either the world 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
511 
 
outside or the world within us. It is the Consciousness that 
maintains, nourishes, and sust ains all the possibilities in 
us. Without this Spiritual Spark functioning in us, we 
would be no more intelligent or divine than the "stone-
world".  
Even by a more material consideration, we can logically 
come to accept the conclusion s declared in this stanza. I 
am standing on the floor of my house; the house is 
supported by my piece of land ; the land is protected by 
the city Corporation; the city is supported by the country; 
and the country is supported by the world; the world is 
supported by water --- the wate rs of the ocean; water is 
held in position by the atmosphere, and the atmosphere is 
a part of the planetary syst em! The universe stays in 
space, and this space rests upon the "concept of space" that 
is in our mind! The mind gets its support from the 
judgement of the intellect. Since the decision of the 
intellect is known and realised by the Consciousness in us, 
this Spiritual Entity is, indeed, the ultimate support for the 
entire world-of-change (Jagat)!!!  
In philosophy, the term Jagat means not only the world of 
objects perceived by us thou gh our sense-organs, but it 
includes in its concept, the world experienced through 
and interpreted by the mind and intellect also. Thus the 
world-of-objects, the world-o f-feelings, and the world-of-
ideas that we experience, to gether, in their totality, 
constitute the Jagat. This is supported by the Conscious 
Principle with Its grace shower ing upon them all. In this 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
512 
 
sense also, Krishna's declarations are scientifically true, 
when He says that the "Higher" Prakriti, the Principle of 
Consciousness, is that  
"BY WHICH THIS ENTIRE WORLD OF EXPERIENCES IS 
SUSTAINED."  
HOW IS THE SELF THE CR EATOR, SUSTAINER AND 
THE DESTROYER OF THE WORLD? LISTEN:  
  
6. Know that these (two PRAKRITIS ) , are the womb of all 
beings. So I am the source and dissolution of the whole universe.  
The above-mentioned Higher and lower-nature, each 
functioning in the embrace of the other, cause all the 
manifestations of the world of plurality. If matter were not 
there, the latent dynamism in  the Spirit will not find a 
field for Its expression. Matter, by itself, in its inertness, 
will not be able to express the similitude of Consciousness 
unless the Spirit were there to dynamise it. Electricity, 
expressing itself through the filament in the bulb, 
manifests as light. Without the bulb, the light in the 
electricity cannot manifest itself, nor can the bulb smile 
forth in light without the electrical current flowing 
through it. The bulb is th e equipment, functioning 
through which, electricity expresses itself as light. 
Similarly, the Spirit, when it comes to function through 
the five layers of matter, discovers for Itself a field to 
express Its own potentialities.  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
513 
 
Keeping this idea in mind, Lord Krishna declares here: 
"THESE TWO ARE THE WOMB OF ALL BEINGS." It is 
not very difficult for an intelligent student to understand 
what it actually means. Not only does the pluralistic 
world of objects, feelings, and ideas rise from, and stay in 
the Spirit, but it dissolves in to It, again to become the 
Higher-Nature. Thus, the lower -nature is, in its essential 
constitution, nothing other th an the Higher. The Higher, 
forgetting Its own divinity, iden tifies Itself with the lower 
and comes to the ego-centric sorrows and imperfections. 
The Higher seemingly suffers , at present, in Its own 
delusions, the sorrows of the lower. Its own rediscovery of 
Its native divine glory is the redemption of matter. The 
idea that the lower has arisen from the Higher is likened 
to the way in which pots of different shapes and colours 
have all arisen from the mud. Just as the mud is the truth 
in all the pots, the Higher is the essential Reality in all the 
objects of the sense-organs, mind and intellect which the 
lower procreates.  
THEREFORE:  
  
7. There is nothing whatsoever higher than Me, O Dhananjaya. 
All this is strung in Me, as clusters of gems on a string.  
There are two possible points of view of life, if the above-
mentioned theory is accepted . There is a point of view 
from the lower and distinctly different from it, there is a 
point of view from the Higher also. Just as in mud there 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
514 
 
are none of the different shapes and colours of the pots, so 
too in the Pure Consciousness there is none of the worlds-
of-objects, or feelings or ideas. "BESIDES ME THERE IS 
NAUGHT."  
After waking up, to the wake r, there is nothing of the 
dream-world for his recognition. In the endless waves that 
rise in the ocean there is nothing other than the ocean 
itself. None of the waves can rise, nor stay, nor ultimately 
reach anywhere but the ocean it self. In short, nothing can 
remain ever totally divorced from its own essential-
nature.  
The first line indicates that each one of us has a "lower-
nature" which is married to our own Self, but still, the 
doubt might come into the minds of the students of the 
Geeta, "that the Self in me is different from the Self in all 
others." This logic of thinking may, as a result, take us to 
the conclusion that there are as many different Selves as 
there are different bodies in the world.  
To show that the Self is one and the same in all forms, it 
has been said here that the Lord is the common factor in 
all forms in the universe. He holds them all intact as the 
string holds all the pearls in a necklace. These words have 
deep significance. Not only is it beautiful in its poetic 
suggestion, but it has also a very exhaustive philosophical 
implication. The pearls in th e necklace are necessarily 
uniform and homogeneous, and its thread, which is 
generally unseen, passes throug h the central core of every 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
515 
 
pearl, and holds them all, the big and the small, into a 
harmonious ornament of beauty.  
Again, the substance of which the pearls are made is 
totally different from the consti tuents that go to make the 
thread. Similarly, the world is constituted of an infinite 
variety of names and forms, which are all held together by 
the Spiritual Truth into a complete whole. Even in an 
individual, the mind, the intellect, the body, each different 
from the others, can harmoniously work and unitedly give 
the music of life for him because the same Conscious 
Principle works through all those different and varying 
matter-envelopments.  
Here is an instance wherein we see Shri Veda Vyasa 
typically expressing himself as the poet-philosopher of the 
world. This example is not on ly poetical but also deeply 
philosophical.  
FURTHER:  
  
8. I am the sapidity in water, O son of Kunti, I am the light in 
the moon and the sun; I am the syllable OM in all the VEDAS, 
sound in ether, and virility in men;  
  
9. I am the sweet fragrance in earth and the brilliance in fire, the 
life in all beings, and I am austerity in the austere.  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
516 
 
How the Supreme Self can be the "thread" upon which the 
'pearls' consisting of individual elements of plurality are 
strung together to become the 'necklace' of the 
harmonious universe, is described in these two verses. It 
has already  
been said, "MY HIGHER PRAKRITI, THE PRINCIPLE OF 
CONSCIOUSNESS," is the womb of all beings, and that 
"BEYOND ME THERE IS NAUGHT." What can be this 
Eternal Factor, which is co mmon in every one --- and yet 
not readily perceptible to all --- is the doubt that has been 
cleared here.  
That which remains in a subs tance from the beginning to 
the end, constantly, and without which the thing cannot 
ever maintain its identity, is called its Dharma --- which is 
its LAW OF BEING. The examples  of 'sapidity in water.' 
'radiance in the sun and the moon,' ' OM in all Vedas,' 
'sound in Akasa,' sweet smell in earth,' luminosity in fire, 
'manhood in man,' and 'auste rity in the austere' --- all 
clearly indicate that the Self is that which gives each 
individual phenomenon its own existence. In short, as the 
stanza declares, the Self is the LIFE IN ALL BEINGS.  
AS A MORE VIVID EXAMPLE, FOR THE READY GRASP 
OF GROSSER INTELLECTS, THE LORD GIVES THE 
FOLLOWING SET OF EXAMPLES:  
  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
517 
 
10. Know Me, O Partha, as the etern al seed of a ll beings; I am 
the intelligence of the intelligen t. The splendour of the splendid 
(things and beings) , am I.  
Not satisfied with the above enumeration --- which can 
truly indicate its full significances only to those who have 
a fairly well-developed subtle  intellect --- the Lord is 
compelled to indicate the same Truth through a set of 
more obvious examples. He says in the stanza, "I AM THE 
ANCIENT SEED OF ALL BEINGS." Not satisfied with this 
statement, as an artist would mix more colours afresh and 
paint, again and again, to bring out his theme more 
vividly to the perception of the on-lookers, Bhagawan 
gives here two more beautiful  instances by which we can 
get an insight into the relationship between the gross 
perceivable matter and the subtle imperceptible Spirit.  
I AM THE INTELLIGENCE OF THE INTELLIGENT --- 
The intelligent man constantly expresses a greater amount 
of divinity in his thoughts an d ideas. In that intelligent 
man, the Self is the intelligence, that subtle-power, 
because of which the individual  is capable of manifesting 
such brilliant comprehension. Sim ilarly, it is also said that 
the Self is that which beams out through the beautiful and 
the energetic.  
In other words, through the instrument of our intellect, it 
is the Consciousness in us that expresses itself as an 
intelligent individual. As a parallel we can say that 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
518 
 
electricity is the "light in th e bulb", is the "heat in the 
heater", is the "music in the radio."  
YET ANOTHER EXAMPLE IS GIVEN IN THE 
FOLLOWING VERSE:  
  
11. Of the strong, I am the strength --- devoid of desire and 
attachment, and in (all) beings, I am the desire --- unopposed to 
DHARMA, O best among the Bharatas.  
Having thus served with different samples the seekers of 
the average intelligence and the dullest in this stanza the 
Lord is trying to indicate the Eternal Self to the MOST 
INTELLIGENT students, who have the capacity to do 
subtle reflection upon such philosophical ideologies.  
I AM THE STRENGTH IN THE STRONG --- This 
statement is evidently as easy of comprehension as the 
example given in the previo us stanza. But the statement 
out-shines the above set of examples when here, Krishna 
gives the phrase qualifying " Balam." Generally, an 
individual expresses his might and strength only when he 
is goaded by his desires or attachments.  
Without these two inner urges it is impossible for us to see 
any expression of might or strength. Desire ( Kama) and 
attachment (Raga) are generally considered by students of 
Vedic literature as almost synonyms; but Shankara, in his 
commentary, has very thoughtfully given us the 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
519 
 
distinction between these two powerful impulses. He says 
Kama is 'desire for what is absent' at present in the scheme 
of our life, and Raga is 'affection for what one already has.' 
These are the two emotions, lashed by which, individuals 
or communities, or societies or nations, generally express 
their might and strength ( Balam). Riots and agitations, 
battles and wars, are all ever motivated by these two 
dangerous urges. In the subtle  definition of the Self, the 
Lord brings a new life of thought here for the 
contemplation of the seeker. He says, the Self is not merely 
the strength in the strong but "I AM THE STRENGTH 
DEVOID OF DESIRE AND ATTACHMENT."  
As though not satisfied with his own definition, the Lord 
gives yet another example. " I  A M  D E S I R E  I N  B E I N G S ,  
UNOPPOSED TO DHARMA." We have already explained 
the term Dharma a s  t h e  ' L A W  O F  B E I N G . '  T h e  e s s e n t i a l  
factor in man is the Divine Consciousness. All actions, 
thoughts and ideas entertained by him which are not 
opposed to his essential Divine Nature constitute his 
Dharma. All actions and thoughts that hasten the evolution 
of man to rediscover his essential Divine Nature are 
considered righteous action ( Dharma), while all activities 
of the mind and intellect that take him away from his true 
Divine Nature and make him behave like an animal and 
degrade him in his evolutionary status, are called 
unrighteous behaviour (A-dharma).  
With this understanding of the term Dharma, the second 
line of the stanza becomes very clear. "ALL DESIRES 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
520 
 
THAT ARE NOT UNRIGHTE OUS FOR THE BEINGS," 
therefore means the glorious urge in the EVOLVERS to 
meet their own inner weakne sses courageously and bring 
out a complete consummation of their evolutionary urge 
to seek and to discover the goal of Self-perfection. This is 
the subtle power that is indicated here. The Lord says: 'I 
am not the Sadhaka, but I am the burning aspiration in 
him, to discover and become one with the Immutable Self.'  
BY THE ABOVE EXAMPLES, DOES IT MEAN THAT 
THE SPIRIT HAS BEEN REALLY CAPTURED AND 
JAILED IN BY MATTER? HOW CAN THE LIMITED 
LIMIT THE UNLIMITED? LISTEN:  
  
12. Whatever beings (and objects) that are pure, active and 
inert, know them to proceed from  Me; yet, I am not in them, 
they are in Me.  
In this stanza, the Lord concludes the topic of His 
discussion, which He undert ook while commenting upon. 
His own statement, "ALL THIS IS STRUNG IN ME AS A 
ROW OF PEARLS ON A STRING."  
The term Maya, as used in Vedantic literature, is nothing 
other than the different impu lses under which the mind 
and intellect of the living kingdom act. The infinite 
varieties of thoughts and ideas that rise in the heart of the 
living kingdom have been obse rved and classified under 
the three main moods, govern ed by which alone do the 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
521 
 
instruments of feeling, thinki ng and action come to play 
their parts everywhere. Thes e three characteristics, the 
eternal moods of the "subtle-body," are called 'unactivity' 
(Sattwa), 'activity' (Rajas), and 'inactivity' (Tamas).  
With this knowledge of the three gunas, as they are called, 
when we try to understand the stanza, it becomes very 
easy reading. "Whatever states pertain to these three 
natural temperaments of the heart and the head, they all 
rise from the Self." This is a statement which is only a re-
interpretation, in philosophica l terminology, of what has 
already been explained. The In finite Consciousness is the 
Supreme Reality, the Spirit, upon which matter, 
constituting Its lower-nature, is but an APPARENT 
experience. They all rise from  the Truth, inasmuch as all 
the waves rise from the ocean, all mud-pots rise from the 
mud, all ornaments made of gold come from gold.  
This verse concludes with a beautiful statement which 
reads like a conundrum. The use of such arresting 
statements is an art delibe rately indulged in by Hindu 
philosophical writers. It ha s the charm that invites an 
independent, intellectual inve stigation by the student, all 
by himself, upon the declaration, in order that he may find 
the sweet secret of its true import and significance. 
"STILL, I AM NOT IN THEM, THEY ARE IN ME."  
Such a statement would necessarily be false in any 
situation because, if A is not B, the latter cannot be in the 
former --- if "I am not in them, they CANNOT be in me." 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
522 
 
This sweet paradoxical statement clearly indicates that the 
relationship between Spirit and matter is not in terms of 
cause and its effect, but it is only as a super-imposition of 
matter upon the Spirit. Addressing the deluded, the post 
can only explain, "the ghost of  your vision had risen from 
me alone, inasmuch as, I alone lend to it its existence; but 
I, the post, am not in the ghost." So, too, shall the ocean 
cry, "the waves rise, stay and dissolve away in me; but I 
am not in the waves."  
As Shankara would have it, the Self declares here that 
even though matter depends entirely for its existence 
upon the Conscious Principle, yet the Divine Spark is in 
no way under the thraldom of matter. Matter ekes out its 
existence from the Spirit; but, the Spirit is --- in no way at 
no time, howsoever little --- controlled, contaminated, or 
shackled by the sad lot of the finite, imperfect matter.  
IN THE FOLLOWING ST ANZA, LORD KRISHNA 
REGRETS THAT THE WORLD DOES NOT 
UNDERSTAND HIM IN HIS TRUE NATURE. WHAT IS 
THIS IGNORANCE ON THE PART OF THE WORLD 
DUE TO? LISTEN:  
  
13. Deluded by these natures (states or things) composed of the 
three GUNAS (of PRAKRITI ) all the world knows Me not as 
Immutable and distinct from them.  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
523 
 
If there be such a Divine Factor, beyond the usual 
cognition of the ordinary mortal s, how is it that they are 
not in a position to understand, at least the presence, if not 
a complete realisation of this great Truth? This question is 
answered here in this verse.  
DELUDED BY THE MODIFI CATIONS OF THE THREE 
gunas, the worlds of living creatures become blind to the 
divine possibilities in themselv es, and live totally a life of 
mere identification with the matter-envelopments. The 
post is covered by the ghost --- vision for the deluded. It is 
a fact that as long as th e ghost is viewed, not even a 
portion of the post will be av ailable for the perception of 
the deluded!  
Similarly, identifying with the Maya-products, the Self 
comes to play the tragic role of  the ego, and the ego, in its 
preoccupations with the oute r-world and with its idle 
imaginations, finds itself incapable of knowing its own 
true nature. This play of hi de-and-seek --- ourselves with 
ourselves in ourselves --- is the strange and mysterious 
play of the ego, creating the universal sorrow and the 
endless mental squalor therein.  
THIS "POWER OF VEILING" IN EVERY ONE OF US IS 
DEFINED AND DESCRIBED IN THE FOLLOWING 
STANZA:  
  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
524 
 
14. Verily, this divine illusi on of Mine, made up of GUNAS 
(caused by the qualities) is diffic ult to cross over; those who take 
refuge in Me, they alone cross over this illusion.  
Lord Krishna himself admits that it is not easy for any 
ego-centric individual to transcend this delusion in 
himself which is caused by "My Maya." If a doctor were to 
come and diagnose a disease and declare that there was 
no cure for it, nobody will have the faith to follow that 
doctor's prescription and ad vice carefully and cheerfully. 
Similarly here, if Krishna's diagnosis of the world's 
sorrows and problems is to be defined by the term Maya, 
and if the Doctor of the Un iverse declares that this Maya-
disease is difficult to cure, nobody would faithfully follow 
such a sad pessimistic philosophy.  
Krishna realises these defects and therefore, immediately 
removes any such misconcepti on from the minds of the 
students of the Geeta. Sometimes a doctor will have to use 
strong words in describing th e illness to the patient in 
order to bring home to the s ufferer the seriousness of his 
malady; so too, Krishna is here only bringing home to us, 
by a direct merciless thrust, the seriousness of the mental 
tragedy into which the Supreme has seemingly fallen, to 
become the finite mortal ego! After declaring the 
seriousness of the disease and after giving the 
prescription, He hastens to guarantee a complete cure for 
this painful malady of man.  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
525 
 
THOSE WHO DEVOTE THEMSELVES TO ME ALONE 
shall cross over their subjective delusion, which has 
created for man the objective worlds of sorrows and 
imperfections. How to do this  has been already explained 
while discussing the technique of meditation, in the last 
chapter. With single-pointed mind, to contemplate upon 
the Self is the direct path; and in order to walk this 
narrow-way, the mind is to be made steady and 
concentrated, through the pr ocesses that have already 
been discussed. (in Chapter VI-14).  
THEN WHY ALL THOSE WHO MEDITATE UPON 
THEE ARE NOT EXPERIENCING THE GLORY?  
  
15 The evil-doers, the deluded, the lowest of men, do not seek 
Me; they, whose discrimination has been destroyed by their own 
delusions, follow the ways of the demons.  
The last stanza talked of those that can successfully 
transcend their own subjec tive delusion, and here, 
naturally, Krishna is trying to talk about the negative 
nature in those who cannot overcome this delusion to 
realise the Divine in themselves. Unless the contrast of 
ideas is given, the student will not be in a position to 
understand properly what exactly are the mind's 
tendencies and appetites that are the true symptoms of 
delusion.  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
526 
 
LOW MEN, DELUDED AND INDULGING 
THEMSELVES IN EVIL ACTIONS FOLLOW THE PATH 
OF THE DEVIL ( ASURA) AND GET DEPRIVED OF 
THEIR DISCRIMINATION --- We all know that the 
insignia of the higher evolution in man is his rational 
intellect, which can discriminate between the good and 
the bad, the high and the low, the moral and the immoral. 
This discriminative awareness is the subtle instrument by 
which individuals are rendered capable of awakening 
from the dream of their im perfections to their own 
Essential Nature of Absolute Divinity.  
This faculty can function effectively only in a bosom that 
is unagitated by sense-impuls es. The more an individual 
misunderstands himself to be only a mere mass of flesh, 
and continuously pants for self-gratification through sense 
indulgences, the more is he considered a sinner. Sin, in 
this sense, is but a devolu tionary action which is not 
appropriate to the dignity and status of the highest 
evolutionary glory in man. Sin can be perpetrated only by 
those who have deluded themse lves, believing that they 
are masses of flesh, with minds hungry for emotional 
satisfactions and intellects trying to assert and express 
their own ideas. Such people are here called by the Geeta, 
as deluded ( Moodhah). The way-of-life, in such "deluded 
men" (Asura bhava) has been exhaustively described to us 
by indicating the opposite good qualities of the "perfect 
one" (Daivi bhava), later in the Geeta (XVI-3).  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
527 
 
PEOPLE REACH ME THROUGH FOUR DIFFERENT 
APPROACHES; LISTEN:  
  
16. Four kinds of virtuous men worship Me, O Arjuna, the 
dissatisfied, the seeker of (systemati sed) knowledge, the seeker of 
wealth, and the wise, O best among the Bharatas.  
Since the Self is the source of all existence and energy, all 
other apparent activities that are seen at the level of 
matter, must come from the same great, grand motive 
force. Every part of a railway e n g i n e  i s  m a d e  u p  o f  c o l d  
iron, and if the engine can run forward carrying along 
with it a train-load of passengers and goods, there must be 
something other than iron that is giving it the power to 
move. Similarly, when eg o-centric deluded men, 
considering themselves to be their body or mind or 
intellect, act in the world outside, they express a kind of 
seeming dynamism through their matter vestures. When 
those who are living in the matt er-outskirts of the Palace 
of Truth, struggle hard to eke out satisfaction and 
happiness, fulfilling their desires, they too act invoking all 
their energies from the Spirit.  
Even when the deluded ego-centres want to live in their 
realm of ignorance and sorrows, they must necessarily 
invoke the required energy and sentiency from the Pure 
Consciousness, the Self. Whether they seek consolation in 
moments of distress, or whether they are mere seekers of 
satisfaction for the demands of the body, for the urges of 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
528 
 
the mind, for the questions of  the intellect, or whether 
t h e y  b e  m e r e  m e n  o f  d e s i r e s ,  s t r i v i n g  h a r d  t o  f u l f i l  t h e i r  
desires or to satisfy their em otions --- they all need the 
energy to function, the capacity to feel and the ability to 
act. This dynamic motive power can reach the inert matter 
and vitalise it, only when the Spirit is invoked and 
contacted.  
This invocation of the required type of energy to flow into 
a particular channel and act therein is called prayer 
(Bhajana). In all true prayers the ego surrenders itself to 
the Spirit with a demand to its Lord to manifest and 
function in any given scheme of  activity. As an analogy 
we may take the example of how we make use of an 
electric plug on the wall. The various equipments such as 
the fan, or the heater, or the toaster, or the refrigerator --- 
all are in themselves mere iron and steel gadgets which 
have no capacity of their own to perform any work. Only 
when the electric current is flowing through them, can 
these machines serve society.  
If I plug a fan into the wall-socket, it is an act where the 
fan is, as it were, invoking the dynamic "current" to flow 
through it. If the right instrument is contacted with the 
"current," I will be served by the required manifestation. 
But supposing, in winter, I switch the fan on, I have no 
right then to complain that the electricity is cruel to me. If, 
unintelligently, I invoke the Truth to play through my 
mind which is mal-adjusted with wrong tendencies, the 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
529 
 
Spirit flowing through such an instrument can bring about 
nothing but sorrows for myself and disturbances to others.  
With this scriptural idea that the Self has the total 
monopoly of all sentience and life, Krishna says here that 
everyone, be he a sinner or a saint, foolish or wise, dull or 
energetic, cowardly or courageous, must "invoke Me" 
(Bhajana) and "I express Myself through the individual 
mental composition as th e one who has the above 
qualities." "Each individual must approach Me," be it 
consciously or unconsciously, ere he can express himself 
at the intellectual, mental, or physical level of his 
personality.  
If everyone must thus invo ke the Self in expressing 
himself, or in fulfilling his ideas and emotions, then 
everyone is "sacred" and "virtuous," for, all of us, without 
an exception, are devotees at the Temple of the Spirit. 
Lord Krishna, the Self, now expounds how the 
numberless persons that reac h him with endless prayers, 
can all be classified under four distinct groups:- 
(a) Men who are dissatisfied with even the best in life 
(Arttah) approach this Life Energy in themselves, for 
fighting against and for gain ing a total relief from the 
spiritual distress that is thre atening them in their within. 
They turn to Me, the Lord.  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
530 
 
(b) Seekers of knowledge and understanding, from a mere 
idle curiosity to study and come to know My Nature, ever 
invoke the grace of the Spirit.  
(c) All men, throughout thei r life-time, spend themselves 
irresistibly in some field of activity or the other, under the 
whip of their desires. Fulfilment of desires is the urge 
under which every member of  the living kingdom acts 
restlessly, all through his lifetime. The inert materials of 
the body and intellect cannot act unless the Spirit is 
invoked to play through them.  
(d) We have yet a rare few, who approach the SANCTUM 
SANCTORUM of the Temple of the Spirit, demanding 
nothing, expecting nothing, carrying with them only 
themselves as their offerings. They offer themselves as an 
oblation in a pure spirit of love-inspired total self-
surrender. The only cry in thei r heart is that the Spirit 
should end their sense of separation and accept them back 
into the embrace of the Lord, to be made one with Him. 
These Jnanis constitute the last typ e who try to invoke the 
Spirit.  
OF THESE FOUR TYPES WHICH IS THE BEST?  
  
17. Of them the wise, ever steadf ast and devoted to the One, 
excels; for, I am exceedingly dear to the wise, and he is dear to 
Me.  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
531 
 
Comparing and contrasting these four above-mentioned 
groups among themselves, the Lord declares here that the 
Jnani, who with a steadfast mind, surrenders himself to 
the Self, with an integrated heart of total devotion, which 
is not dissipated by other parallel aspirations, represents 
the best. Single-pointedness of mind can be gained only 
when the goal of the medita tor is fixed and steady. The 
unbroken and all-out aspiration of the seeker to reach his 
own Real Nature, the Self, is called single-pointed-
devotion (Eka bhaktih).  
This is possible only when one withdraws oneself totally 
from all other extrovert dema nds of the lower nature in 
him. In the case of a Jnani, therefore, the Spirit is invoked 
not for the acquisition of anything, but for the annihilation 
of all the self-destructive channels through which his 
spiritual dynamism gushes out day-to-day, only to get 
wasted on the dry rocks of the world of hallucination. 
Naturally, therefore, the Self, as a personification in 
Krishna, declares in the Geeta that the Jnanis are the 
highest and the best among the living kingdom who reach 
the PORTALS OF TRUTH with their individual demands 
and aspirations, to experience  their final merger in the 
Self.  
To the truly wise "SUPREMELY DEAR AM I." Love is 
measured by the amount of identification the lover has 
gained with the beloved. Sel f-surrender is the tune in 
which the song of love is truly sung. Selfessness is the key 
in which the duet of love is played. Love demands "giving 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
532 
 
without expecting any return," at all times, in all 
circumstances. With this understanding of the nature of 
true love, when one tries to understand the attitude of the 
Jnani towards the Self, it is true that a Jnani alone knows 
how to love wholly, completely.  
One-sided love never culminates in any consummation. 
Man may approach the Spiritual Centre in himself in an 
attitude of discrimination an d surrender --- with all his 
aspiration and love --- but if it is not reciprocated by the 
Spirit, it might become as trag ic as the case of the Greek 
boy who fell in love with his own reflection. Here, when 
Krishna declares, "AND HE IS DEAR TO ME," a great 
psychological truth has been expounded. It is the Eternal 
Law that love, with no strings attached to it, can not only 
order its own fulfilment, but can also convert even the 
base into the noble by its silent persuasions and 
mysterious charms.  
Scientifically viewed, it is an ob servable fact that if a mind 
is powerfully charged with a certain emotion --- be it 
sorrow, hatred, jealousy, love  or kindness --- it can bring 
about sympathetic vibrations of similar emotions in the 
chambers of the hearts that co me near it. When one full of 
hatred approaches us, he can influence and fill our hearts 
to the full with hatred. So too, if we can give the required 
dose of pure and sincere love, unmotivated by any desire 
or selfishness, it is a law that even the bitterest enemies, 
with their hearts full of hatred , can be forced to reflect 
nothing but love towards us. This psychological truth, in 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
533 
 
all its implications, has been brought out vividly when the 
Geeta states that even the In finite and Eternal Truth has, 
helplessly, to come under the charm of pure and selfless 
courting of the meditator with Eka bhaktih.  
THEN, ARE NOT THE THREE OTHERS, THE 
DISSATISFIED AND THE REST, DEAR TO VASUDEVA? 
NOT SO. THEN HOW IS IT?  
  
18. Noble indeed are all these, bu t the wise man, I deem, as My 
very Self; for, steadfast in mind he is established in Me alone as 
the Supreme Goal.  
With the large-heartedness of a master-mind, Lord 
Krishna declares here that all creatures living the life of 
intelligent seeking and indust rious efforts are blessed, 
inasmuch as they all are, in  their own way, approaching 
the same fountain of  
the Infinite for tapping ou t their required energies. 
Although some are invoking the Eternal Spiritual Strength 
for the purposes of reducing their distress, or for fulfilling 
their desires, they all are, for one reason or the other, 
approaching the Self, and therefore, relatively, diviner 
than the insentient 'mineral world.' However, comparing 
and contrasting them with the Jnanis, the Lord says: "BUT, 
THE MAN OF KNOWLEDGE, I REGARD AS MY OWN 
SELF."  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
534 
 
It is very well-known that there is a lot of difference 
between maintaining one's frie ndship with the minister, 
and oneself becoming a minister. No doubt, to be a friend 
o f  a  m i n i s t e r  i s  t o  g a i n  s o m e  a m o u n t  o f  i n f l u e n c e  a n d  
power in society; but the entire might and glory come to 
the man when he himself becomes the minister. Similarly, 
to be capable of invoking and directing the Spiritual 
Strength is certainly divine; but a man of Knowledge is 
one who, courting Truth in a spirit of total identification 
with It, successfully attains th e total transcendence of his 
individual mind-and-intellect, whereby his ego 
rediscovers itself to be nothing other than the Self. He 
becomes one with It.  
Such a Jnani, thereafter, ever remains in the divine sense of 
identification with the self . This emphasis of extra 
preference to the status of a Man-of-Wisdom, is according 
to Krishna, his personal opinion (Matam).  
  
19. At the end of many births  the wise man comes to Me, 
realising that all this is Vasude va (the innermost Self) ; such a 
great soul (MAHATMA) is very hard to find.  
That such pure Men-of-Wisdom are necessarily few in the 
history of the world, is th e declaration here, which, in 
decadent Hinduism, we have learnt to consider as an 
extremely pessimistic assert ion (VI-45). A little thought 
should clearly make the fallacy of this wild conclusion 
quite evident to us. The entire human kingdom is, indeed, 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
535 
 
a very negligible and small proportion of the total sentient 
creatures in the world. In the community of man, not all 
have a fully developed instrument of rational thinking 
and divine emotion.  
Even among those who have fully developed mental and 
intellectual capacities, it is a rare few that seriously take 
up the study of the scriptu res. All those who STUDY 
scriptures do not LIVE the scriptures, but they come to 
feel fulfilled in a mere understanding of its contents. 
Therefore, it becomes evident that only a rare few can ever 
reach the goal of evolution and come to discover their true 
Divine Nature of Perfection.  
Like Darwin in our own days, the ancient Rishis also had 
observed in their times, that this development can take 
place only when, in the flood of time, the different 
circumstances have rubbed down and polished the 
imperfect into the shape and be auty of the perfect. It takes 
trillions of years for an organism to evolve from one given 
form of existence into a higher  form of life. Naturally, it 
becomes quite clear that for rational being of subtlest 
potentialities, it should take an indefinitely large number 
of lives in different manifestations to scrape off all his 
ignorance, and thereby, ultimately reach the Perfect Realm 
of all Knowledge.  
This DOES NOT MEAN that none among us, now striving 
so hard, has any chance of reac hing the goal of life in this 
very birth. It is not in an y pessimistic hopelessness and 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
536 
 
total despair, that this statem ent is made by the Lord in 
the Geeta. On the other hand, it is solely for bringing into 
the recognition of the student the urgency of his faithful 
pursuit of the higher life. The very fact that a seeker has 
come to feel a disappointment  with his present state of 
existence, and the fact that he has discovered enough 
intellectual capacity to appreciate and comprehend the 
subtle thoughts of the Upanishadic lore, clearly shows that 
he has reached the very archway  to the temple of the Self. 
A little more sincere and stea dy self-application can take 
him to the highest state of his evolution.  
NOW IT WILL BE SHOWN WHY THE PEOPLE ARE 
NOT GENERALLY AWARE THAT THE SELF, OR 
VASUDEVA, ALONE IS THE ALL:  
  
20. Those whose wisdom has been l ooted away by this or that 
desire, go to other gods, following this or that rite, led by their 
own nature.  
Desire for the sense-objects of the world and the urge for 
sense-gratification are the great factors which cloud the 
discriminative potentialities in the human intellect. It is 
impossible that an individual is not made conscious of his 
own Self, in the light of a powerful and strong 
discrimination.  
Earlier, we were told that the deity for whose propitiation 
we performed the Yajna was none other than "the 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
537 
 
productive potential in any given field of activity." 
Reading the stanza in the light  of this interpretation we 
may say that the deity mentioned here denotes nothing 
other than the various joys contained in the different 
sensuous fields which are courted by us, when we get 
lashed by desires, in order that we may gain a complete 
and exhaustive satisfaction from them.  
Desires are the springs from which thoughts continuously 
gurgle up to flood the mental zone, and disturb the 
glorious reflection of Truth in  it. When the mind is thus 
disturbed, the discriminative capacity in the intellect is 
rendered dull, and naturally , that individual becomes 
incapable of distinguishing in  his understanding, the Real 
from the unreal. When the brilliance of the human 
intellect has been clouded with the vapours of desire, the 
owls of negativity and delusory attachments start hooting 
in the jungles of that mind.  
It is not the mere appearance of desires in the mind that 
causes the fall of man. No individual can resist the 
compelling charm of the desire s rising in his bosom. But 
when he comes to identify  himself with them, the 
thoughts rising in him are directly governed by his 
desires. When once a given desire has been identified 
with, the desirer himself, unco nsciously, comes to lend an 
uncontrollable amount of dynamism to the upsurge of the 
flood of thoughts.  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
538 
 
Thoughts themselves are iner t matter, inasmuch as they 
are the by-product of food , being constituted of the 
subtlest aspect of the food consumed. These inert thought-
waves gather a momentum an d force by borrowing their 
strength and vigour from the Self, through the 
individual's enthusiastic identi fication with those desires. 
The urge of thoughts determin es the action. The actor in 
the field, for the time-being , is rendered incapable of 
discriminating whether the ac tion undertaken can, or 
cannot, ultimately bring to him a permanent and an 
enduring satisfaction. Drunk with the idea that he will be 
at least temporarily appeased, the individual struggles 
hard and strives intensively to invoke and propitiate THE 
PRODUCTIVE POTENTIAL OF ANY GIVEN FIELD OF 
HIS ACTIVITY (DEVATA).  
In thus invoking the Devata of a given field, the individual 
has to strive in a proper and fitting fashion. The methods 
of assembling the required instruments, the techniques of 
their application, the time intervals necessary for maturing 
the results, and the type of  gains accrued from the 
different kinds of application... all these differ from field 
to field in the world. Therefore, each one will have to 
"FOLLOW THIS OR THAT RITE," according to the type of 
his desires.  
The reason why different pers ons thus struggle hard so 
differently, leaving aside all sincere struggles to realise the 
Self, as "VASUDEVA IS ALL TH IS," is explained here in 
the second line. Each individual helplessly functions in the 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
539 
 
different fields of his tempo rary fascinations, according to 
the mental impressions, gath ered in his earlier moments 
of activity and thought. To conceive that "the Creator is 
putting ideas into each one of us because of which one is 
good and another vile," is a philosophy of the defeatist, of 
the impotent, of the sluggard. True men of action, with the 
daring of a well-developed in tellect, can very easily see 
through men and their behaviours and come to this bold 
conclusion that each man acts as per the schedule, 
maintained and ordered by himself, during his own past 
actions.  
In short, a deluded person strives hard, running after the 
mirage of sensuality, vainly hoping to gain therein a 
satisfaction that is at once  infinite and immortal, while 
another is found to have the subtle discrimination to 
discover for himself the hollowness and futility of sense-
pursuit. This latter type withdraws from all these 
ultimately unprofitable fields, and with avidity seeks the 
path to the Real.  
WHAT THEN IS THE FUNCTION OF THE ATMAN, THE 
GUARDIAN ANGLE IN EACH ONE OF US?  
  
21. Whatsoever form any devotee desires to worship with faith --
- that (same) faith of his I make (firm and) unflinching.  
In the very opening of this chapter (VII-7), discriminating 
the Self from the not-Self, it was shown how Krishna is the 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
540 
 
Spiritual Principle, the Common Truth that holds together 
the multiple universe of names and forms. It was also said 
(VII-14) that the three-fold mental temperaments ( gunas), 
that work up the "divin e illusion," hoodwink the 
individual from right cognition of the Divine Self within 
him. But for the Conscious Principle thrilling the inert 
matter walls that seemingly encircle the spirit, neither our 
physical, nor mental, nor intellectual personalities can 
e v e r  c o m e  t o  f u n c t i o n ,  a s  t h e y  d o  n o w .  I t  i s  v e r y  w e l l -
known that all men do not worship at the same altar. Each 
one approaches the same Truth by worshipping the idol of 
his own heart. Krishna here declares the sacred truth that 
in all Churches, Mosques, and Temples, in public places, 
or in private institutions, in th e open, or on the sly, in the 
quiet huts, and in the silent caves --- wherever and in 
whatsoever form, any devotee seeks to worship with 
Shraddha, "HIS FAITH DO I MAKE UNWAVERING." A 
faithful follower of the Geeta can never be contaminated 
by sectarianism or intolerance. At the foot of every altar, it 
is Krishna, the Self, that constantly supplies more and 
more faith to water the expanding fields of devotion in the 
sincere devotees.  
Applying this general statemen t to the subjective worship 
in the human bosom, we can very easily understand the 
greater import of this stanza.  
In the world outside, it is very well-known that the greater 
the consistency with which an idea or an attachment is 
maintained by an individual, the greater does he become 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
541 
 
fixed in that temperament or relationship. The more often 
a particular type of thought is entertained in the mind, the 
deeper becomes that thought channel, strengthening that 
very mental impression. These deep-cut patterns of 
thought, ploughed along the valleys of the mind, indicate 
the pattern of desires which the individual had 
entertained. In the law that governs this psychological 
rule, we can spy and detect th e Spiritual Reality and Its 
infinite and glorious might.  
In short, the Lord says that  "as we think so we become," 
and the more we become, the more we think in the same 
given pattern. Applying this principle of psychology, it 
becomes clear, beyond all doubts, why everyone of us is 
bound by our own habits, an d how we get chained by our 
own peculiar type of thinking. The sensuous are not to be 
condemned, and equally so, the divine need not be 
congratulated! Both of them are the exact products of their 
individual types of thinking. Thought belongs to the 
realm of nature ( Prakriti); thoughts create the world and 
the all-pervading Self is the Essential Substratum 
(Purusha) that provides the world-drama with its stage 
and scenario.  
WITH THIS EVER-GROWING FAITH, HOW DOES THE 
MAN-OF-THE-WORLD GAIN HIS PARTICULAR 
DESIRE?  
  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
542 
 
22. Endued with that faith, he en gages in the worship of that 
'DEVATA' and from it he obtains hi s desire-fulfilments; all 
these being ordained, indeed, by Me (alone) .  
Imbued with this faith he invokes the Devata of his choice 
and gains the fulfilment of his desires. And, Lord Krishna 
adds that in all cases these desires are "BEING VERILY 
DISPENSED BY ME ALONE." The Se lf is the source of all 
activities, gains, fulfilments and despairs. The sense of joy 
or sorrow, of success or failure, is but a mental thought-
wave; but for the Conscious principle illumining it, we 
would not have any such experience.  
Faithful activity in any given field of action, brings about 
complete success, but the very existence of the field, the 
capacity to act, the fervour of faith that supplies 
consistency to all efforts --- all these are possible only in 
the medium of the Changeless, the Actionless, the 
Attributeless, Eternal Self. And Krishna, identifying 
Himself with this Spiritual Centre of the Universe, rightly 
declares here, that He alone is the one that supplies an 
ever-growing faith in all activities, and ultimately, when 
the laws of action are fulfilled to the last bit, both in their 
intensity and application, it is He alone who dispenses the 
exact result of each action.  
When a well-adjusted radio is plugged onto the current, 
the Electric Current says that it alone is the 'dispenser' of 
the programme available at the Station for the listeners!  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
543 
 
SINCE THE DELUDED ONES DESIRE THE FINITE 
SENSE OBJECTS, THEY DO NOT COME TO THE ALL-
SATISFYING PEACE; AND HENCE, IT IS SAID:  
  
23. Verily the "fruit" that accrues to those men of little-
intelligence is finite. The worshippers of the DEVAS go to the 
DEVAS but My devotees come to Me.  
The fruits accruing to "THESE MEN OF LITTLE 
UNDERSTANDING ARE LIMITED." Fleeting desires for 
finite objects, even when fulfilled through the 
impermanent activities, must surely prove to be 
ephemeral. Out of gold whatever ornament is made, it 
a l s o  m u s t  b e  g o l d  a l o n e ;  w hen chocolate is made out of 
sweet things, the resultant stuff cannot be bitter. The 
effects entirely depends, for their nature and quality, upon 
those of the causes.  
Finite actions undertaken in finite fields, employing finite 
instruments, cannot but produce --- whether joy or sorrow 
--- finite "fruits." Joy arrest ed or ended is sorrow; and 
therefore, in each instance of a sensuous desire satisfied, 
though there is a joy and a fulfilment, the sense-of-
satisfaction soon putrefies to provide the sourness of 
dissatisfaction, or more often, the bitterness of sorrow.  
This statement of the Lord is supported by the following 
general rule that, "THE WORSHIPPERS OF THE DEVAS 
REACH THE DEVAS." Those who are invoking a desired 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
544 
 
'profit potential,' in any given field of activity, can, even 
when completely successful, gain only THAT profit.  
The above statement is declare d as a contrast to a pure 
philosophical truth, when the Lord, says: "THOSE WHO 
DEVOTE THEMSELVES TO ME, COME TO ME." Seekers 
of happiness in the world of sense-objects, as a result of 
their strife and struggle, ca n gain their insignificant 
success in the field of sense-en joyments. If the same effort 
is applied by them in the right life of constructive living, 
they can come to discover their identity with the Eternal 
Absolute, the Self. Due to the extrovertedness of the 
deluded ego, it comes to identify itself with its finite 
matter-envolopments, and revels  in a world of its endless 
number of objects, called in Sanskrit as the Jagat.  
Discriminative and careful seekers, understanding the 
utter uselessness of the pursuit of finite pleasures, detach 
themselves from their false ego-centric lives, and through 
the process of meditation upon  the Self, as advised in the 
previous chapter, come to rediscover their own Real 
Nature in the sunny fields of Bliss that lie unrolled beyond 
the thorny by-lanes of all physical, psychological and 
intellectual quests.  
In the language of the Geet a, the first person singular 
stands always, at all places, for the Infinite Reality which 
is the Substratum for the in dividual as well as for the 
whole. Therefore, "MY DEVOTEES COME TO ME," is not 
the assertion of a limited historical figures as the son of 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
545 
 
Devaki, but the Singer of the Geeta, in His divine 
inspiration, entirely identifi es Himself with the Principle 
of Consciousness that is the core of the pluralistic dream 
of the mind-intellect equipmen t. Thus, to understand the 
above statement, without its seeming limitations, is to 
understand the Geeta, the Scri pture of Man, as declaring 
that the seekers of the Self discover themselves and 
become the Self.  
THEN WHY DO PEOPLE IN GENERAL FAIL TO 
REACH THE SELF? LISTEN:  
  
24. The foolish think of Me, the Un manifest, as having come to 
manifestation, not knowing My higher, immutable and peerless 
nature.  
Men who lack discrimination and the capacity to perceive 
the subtle Truth that shines  in and through the vast 
disturbances of the endless pl urality, fail to realise the 
immutable and the peerless Self. In their extreme 
preoccupation with the ev er-changing glory of the 
perceivable, the Prakriti, (VII-4 and 6) they do not 
u n d e r s t a n d  t h a t  " A L L  T H I S  I S  S T R U N G  I N  M E  A S  A  
ROW OF PEARLS ON A STRING."  
This fundamental Reality, that is the beam of brilliance in 
which like dust-particles the Universes dance about, is 
termed as the "Unmanifest." This  term is to be understood 
in all its philosophical implic ations. That which is called 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
546 
 
the MANIFEST is available either for the perceptions of 
the sense-organs, or for the feelings of the mind, or for the 
understanding of the intellect. That which is not available 
for any one of these instrument s of cognition, feeling or 
understanding is considered as the UNMANIFEST.  
The Self, indeed, should then be considered as the 
UNMANIFEST, for it is the VITALITY behind the sense-
organs, the FEELER --- potential in the mind and the very 
LIGHT that illumines the intellect.  
The distorted intellects of the extroverts, in their 
miscalculations, come to th e false judgement that the 
physical glory of the Prophet, or of the incarnation, is all 
that is the Eternal Truth. The point-of-concentration 
(Upasya) is to be considered, no doubt, as the symbol of 
the Truth which the devotee is seeking, but it cannot IN 
ITSELF be the Truth. If it were the Truth, then after 
carving out an idol, or after approaching a Guru, the 
devotee has nothing more to do, since he has gained the 
Truth! Idol worship is only a convenience for gathering 
true concentration, for getti ng an initial momentum for 
the final flight into themse lves, to reach the Self and 
discover therein their own oneness with It.  
This stanza gives us a clear insight into the futility of 
mistaking the bottle for the me dicine, the physical form 
for the Guru, the idol for the God! All white-wood is not 
the fragrant sandal-wood. Any br ight light high up in the 
sky, however resplendent it might be, is not a star. Some 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
547 
 
men of incomparable foolishness may come to declare that 
the light from a tower is the Sun, but no wise man of the 
town will accept it. The idea of Divine Incarnation is 
accepted in Hinduism, and according to its theory, 
EVERYONE IS AN INCARN ATION-TO-A-DEGREE! The 
same Truth pervades all, and is in each. It expresses 
through the enveloping layers of the mind-and-intellect. 
The clearer the mind and th e purer the intellect, the 
greater is the effulgence of the Divine that beams out 
through them.  
When the Self in anyone beams out through the steadied 
and purified mind and intellect completely sublimating 
his lower nature ( Prakriti), he becomes a Prophet, a Sage. 
Krishna, Rama, Christ, Mohammed, Buddha, Mahavira 
are some of the examples. These Men-of-realisation, 
discovering their Self, understood and lived every 
moment of their lives in the Self, as the Self of all. To 
mistake their physical structure,  or the lingering traces of 
their mind, or the film of their intellectual personality, for 
the very Essence of Truth, which these God-men were, is 
to make as miserable a mistak e as taking the waves to be 
the ocean!  
Naturally, therefore, Krishna us es here a severe term, to 
indicate such deluded men of superstitious false 
understanding, as "UNINTELLIGENT FOOLS" ( A-
Buddhayah).  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
548 
 
WHAT CAUSES THIS PREVALENT IGNORANCE OF 
THE TRUE NATURE IS EXPLAINED IN THE 
FOLLOWING:  
  
25. I am not manifest to all (i n My Real Nature) veiled by 
Divine- 'MAYA. ' This deluded world knows not Me, the 
Unborn, the Imperishable.  
If there be such a glorious Essential Truth, which is the 
core of everything, why is it that it is not freely known and 
experienced by everyone at all times? In short, "what 
stands between me and my Self?" Why is it that we behave 
as though we are but limited ego-centric entities, 
incapacitated as we are, to comprehend that in essence we 
are the Infinite, the Immortal? These questions are 
unavoidable to an intelligen t seeker, when he, in his 
aspirations, comes face to face with the staggering 
revelations contained in Vedanta.  
THIS DELUDED WORLD KNOWS ME NOT, THE 
UNBORN AND THE IMMORTAL because their own 
"ILLUSION, BORN OUT OF THE THREE ' GUNAS,' 
VEILS ME." " Maya" is the most difficult theme of all for 
elementary students of Vedanta, when they try merely to 
understand this Science of Life objectively. The moment a 
student tries to experiment with this "Knowledge" upon 
himself subjectively, the expl anations contained in the 
theory become evident. Maya is the conditioning through 
which, when the Non-dual Tr uth expresses Itself, the One 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
549 
 
Reality seems to fan out as the spectrum of the multiple 
universe.  
The principle of Maya functioning in the individual is 
termed ignorance ( Avidya). This subjective malady, which 
provides in its wake, the dreamy hallucinations of a 
sorrowful world of change and imperfections, has been 
very closely observed, and the Rishis of old have declared 
that it is caused by three types of "moods" in man's inner 
personality. These three temperaments ( gunas), called 
Sattwa, Rajas and Tamas, provide a prism, viewed through 
which, the kaleidoscopic world seems to dance, flashing 
its infinite patterns. Rajas creates 'mental-agitations" 
(Vikshepa), and Tamas creates the "intellectual-veiling" 
(Avarana).  
To him who becomes confused  and confounded by the 
play of these triple temperaments, the Self is not available 
for direct experience. Special instructions from teachers 
and diligent practice on the part of students are both 
necessary in order to make one realise one's own Real 
Nature. To an ignorant man of the jungle, electricity is 
unmanifest in the bulb and in its incandescent filament. In 
order to perceive the electrical current that flows through 
the equipment, theoretical knowledge and experimental 
confirmation are essential. After having gained the 
knowledge of the electrical energy and its properties, 
when the student happens to see the very same bulb, he 
comes to cognise through the perceived bulb the 
imperceptible, the unmanifest electrical energy!  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
550 
 
Similarly, when through self-control, listening, reflection, 
and meditation, the agitations of the mind are quietened, 
and when the veiling has been pulled down, the seeker re-
discovers "ME THE UNBORN, THE IMMUTABLE." As 
long as the agitations of the mind veil the intellect from its 
awareness of the Self, so long the limited ego ( Jeeva) pants 
to fulfil itself and to gain the Infinite among the gutters of 
its sensual cravings!  
Such frenzied hearts reeking with desires and lacerated 
with disappointments, crus hed by dissatisfactions and 
smothered by the fear of their own annihilation --- can 
never have the integrated equipoise to live even a moment 
of still-awareness to experience the Pure Consciousness. 
"THE DELUDED WORLD KNOWS ME NOT" as it is 
steeped in "THE ILLUSION BORN OUT OF THE THREE-
FOLD gunas." Screened off by this universe of names and 
forms, which is but an apparent  projection of the Self, the 
sense-organs, mind or intellect fail to perceive It. The 
ghost veils the post! The mirag e-waters clothe the desert!! 
The waves screen off the ocean!!!  
THE PRESENT CONDITION OF IGNORANCE AND 
CONFUSION IN THE LIMITED FINITE EGO IS 
BROUGHT OUT VERY VIVI DLY IN THE FOLLOWING, 
BY CONTRASTING IT AGAINST THE BACK-GROUND 
OF THE SELF, WHICH IS OF THE NATURE OF ALL 
KNOWLEDGE:  
  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
551 
 
26. I know, O Arjuna, the beings of the past, and present and 
the future, but no one knows Me.  
The idea that God is Omniscient is common to all religions 
of the world, but a satisfactory explanation of this concept 
is given only in Vedanta. In the Geeta too --- as a Bible of 
the Hindu religion, as a hand-book of easy reference for 
the students of the Upanishads --- we find a wider hint as 
to what we mean by the Omniscience of the Self.  
The Self, as the Pure Consci ousness, is the illuminating 
principle that brings the en tire field of the mind and 
intellect under the beam of Its clear awareness. Even the 
world-of-objects is brought within our understanding 
only when it enters, through the sense-organ-doors, and 
reaches the mental lake, and makes therein its 
characteristic thought-waves;  
the thought-waves make the intellect function in 
classifying and determining them. Both these mental and 
intellectual disturbances are illumined for us by the ever-
wakeful Consciousness, the Self in us.  
Sunlight illuminates all the objects of the world. When my 
eyes or ears illumine a given form or sound, I say that I 
see or hear that particular form or sound. In short, to be 
aware of a thing is to know th at thing; and to know is to 
illumine. Just as the Sun can be considered as the "eye of 
the world," inasmuch as without the Sun all organs-of-
vision will be blind aperture s, so too, the Self can be 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
552 
 
considered as the knower of everything, in everyone, at all 
times, and in all places. This  Omniscience of the Supreme 
is vividly hinted at here, when Krishna declares, "I KNOW 
THE BEINGS OF THE PAST, OF THE PRESENT, AND 
OF THE FUTURE."  
It must be noted that the Eternal Self is not only the 
Awareness that lights up a ll bosoms at this present 
moment, but it was the awareness that illumined the 
objects, feelings and thoughts in all bosoms from the 
beginningless beginning of crea tion and it shall be the 
same Principle behind every knower that knows anything 
in all the future generations till the endless end of time!  
Electricity revolves the fan; but the fan can never fan the 
electricity! The gazer surveys the heavens through a 
telescope, but the telescope can never survey the gazer! 
The Conscious Principle vitalises the food-made mind and 
intellect and makes them capa ble of feeling and thinking. 
Without the Self dynamising them, they are incapable of 
sense-perceptions; but neither the mind, nor the intellect, 
can perceive, feel, or comprehend the Subjective Principle, 
the Self. The Lord declares here that, though he knows 
everything, at all times, in all places, He is known by none 
at any place or at any time --- "BUT ME NONE KNOWS."  
According to the strictest Vedantic philosophy, the Self is 
not a "knower," just as in the strictest logic of thought it 
would not be correct to say that the Sun "illumines" the 
world. From our standpoint, contrasting with the hours of 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
553 
 
night when things are not illumined, we may rightly 
attribute the function of illuminating things during the 
day to the 'principle of light' called the Sun. However, 
from the standpoint of the Sun, which is ever brilliant, 
there is no moment when he is not blessing the objects 
with his shining touch. Therefor e, it is as meaningless to 
say that the Sun "illumines" the objects, as to say that "I am 
too busy now-a-days breathing"!  
'Knower-hood' is a status gained by Self when It functions 
through the equipment of Maya; and the Self, that 
functions in and through delusory Maya, is called the 
God-principle, termed in the Vedantic literature as Ishwara. 
Here Krishna is pictured by Vyasa as the divine 
embodiment of Truth, and an Incarnation of the Self, and 
therefore, it is perfectly right if He arrogates to Himself 
the nature of Omniscience and declares Himself as "THE 
KNOWER OF EVERYTHING IN ALL THE THREE 
PERIODS OF TIME."  
But unfortunately, an ego-centric mortal viewing the 
universe through the pin-hole of his congested, 
constricted and limited mind-and-intellect, fails to see the 
harmonious rhythm in the ma crocosm. He who can rip 
open his own self-made bondages of ignorance and rise to 
attune himself with the macrocosm, can certainly come to 
experience the Krishna view-point. Anyone who 
successfully comes to live thus in unison with the cosmic 
mind, is the Krishna of that age and for ever thereafter.  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
554 
 
IF THE SELF IS THE ETERNAL KNOWER OF ALL 
CONDITIONED-KNOWLEDGE, THEN, WHAT VEILS 
THIS ESSENTIAL NATURE FROM OUR REALISATION? 
LISTEN:  
  
27. By the delusion of the pairs-of -opposites arising from desire 
and aversion, O Bharata, all beings  are subject to delusion at 
birth, O Parantapa (scorcher of foes) .  
A highly scientific and extr emely subtle philosophical 
truth has been suggested in th is stanza. In his attempt to 
explain why and how the ego-centric personality in man 
fails to cognise His all-full nature, the Lord touches, by 
implication, the very fundamentals discovered and 
discussed by modern biologists in explaining the 
evolution of organisms. The instinct of self-preservation is 
the most powerful urge unde r which the individualised 
ego tries to live its life of continuous change. This instinct 
of preservation expresses itself  in the intellectual zone as 
binding desires for things that contribute to the 
continuous welfare and well-being of the individual's 
mundane existence.  
When the impulse of desire, flowing from a bosom 
towards an object of attachment, gets half-way bumped 
upon an object or a being that stands between the bosom 
that craves and the object-of-craving, the refracted desire-
thoughts express themselves as  aversion (II-52, 53). In the 
tug-of-war between these two forces of desire and 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
555 
 
aversion, the hapless ego gets torn asunder and comes to 
suffer the agonising pain of lynching tensions within. 
Naturally, its mind-and-intellect become fully 
preoccupied with its pursuits of the things of its desire, 
and with its efforts at running away from the objects of its 
aversion. Soon the ego-centric personality becomes 
endlessly preoccupied, totall y confused and completely 
exhausted. The host of thought-disturbances that are 
thereby created in the ment al, and in the intellectual 
zones, breed among themselves and add day by day to the 
chaos within. The 'agitation' ( Vikshepa) is that which veils 
(Avarana) the Truth from the direct cognition of the 
individual.  
Therefore, the only way by which we can come to 
rediscover our equipoise and tranquillity as the Eternal 
Self, is to arrest, control and win over the agitations of the 
mind. All spiritual practices in all religions of the world 
are techniques --- either emotional, or intellectual or 
physical --- that aim at bringing  about at least one solitary 
moment of perfect mental poise. Such a moment of poise 
is the moment of perfect mental illumination, the 
auspicious hour of Self-re-discovery and fulfilment of the 
reunion.  
But unfortunately, adds the Lo rd in a divinely pathetic 
note, "ALL BEINGS FALLS INTO THIS DELUSION AT 
THEIR VERY BIRTH." This is not a pessimistic submission 
as to the sorrowful destiny of a man, to escape from which 
he is incapacitated from birt h. Unlike the Christ-religion, 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
556 
 
our Krishna-religion does not conceive a man as "a child 
of sin." The Master-optimist, the Teacher of Hope, the 
Joyous Dancer of the Jamuna banks, is expressing here 
only a philosophical truth, that the very birth of an 
individual into a given embodiment, with its available 
environment, is the tragedy that he himself had planned 
out elaborately for the fulfilment of his own deep cravings 
and secret desires.  
To get out of these delusions and gain the right 
knowledge constitutes the Sacred Goal of Life, and the 
Geeta is the Song of the Self that enchants the erring souls 
away from their confusions to the inviting fields of the 
joyous Perfection.  
TO SHOW THEN WHAT THE QUALIFICATION OF 
THOSE WHO SEEK THE TRUTH ARE, THE 
FOLLOWING IS GIVEN:  
  
28. But those men of virtuous deed s whose sins have come to an 
end, who are freed from the delusion of the pairs-of-opposites 
and steadfast in vows, worship Me.  
"MEN OF VIRTUOUS DEEDS," as a result of their actions, 
"COME TO CLEANSE THEIR SINFUL NATURE" --- is a 
declaration that needs to be correctly understood. Sin is 
not the nature of man; according to Vedanta, it is only the 
tarnish that has come to dim the brilliance of the Self, due 
to an error of judgement in the individual. The craving of 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
557 
 
the mind-and-intellect, to live in subservience to the calls 
and appetites of the grosser outer world, is the root-cause 
for the negative values entertained by us, which 
ultimately result in 'sins.' He  is called a sinful-person in 
whom his body makes the heaviest calls on his time and 
attention. In such a pers on, the body becomes the 
dominant partner, and it 'enslaves' the self. An extrovert 
life --- a life spent in pursuing the satisfaction of his 
sensuous desires, to comfort and console every one of his 
paltry emotions --- is the way of the sinful.  
Such a passionate animal-lif e leaves gross impressions 
upon the mind and intellect. Impressions ( vasanas) decide 
the future flow of thoughts. As the thoughts, so the 
actions, and the action deepen the vasanas.  
To break this ' vasana-thought-action' chain which is now 
digging the grave of the individual's peace and 
tranquillity, it is advised that he start a new life of 
meritorious actions. Merit (punya) is a contrast to sin (papa) 
and therefore, it is constitu ted of actions, feelings and 
thoughts, dedicated to the godly and the divine. All 
introvert actions undertaken in the cognition of "THE 
SELF I AM," would create in their wake new impressions. 
In the long run, the patterns of sin that existed in the 
bosom are wiped out and new divine designs are created 
therein.  
Such a prepared mind-intellect, from which almost all its 
negativities have been rubbed off is "FREE FROM THE 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
558 
 
DELUSION OF THE PAIRS-OF-OPPOSITES." It then 
becomes an instrument that can, with a single-pointed 
steadfastness and firm resolve, meditate upon the Self.  
WHAT WOULD BE THE MOTIVE IN THE HEART OF 
THOSE WHO ARE THUS MEDITATING UPON THE 
SELF AFTER THEIR MINDS HAVE BEEN READJUSTED 
BY LIVING THE LIFE-DIVINE? LISTEN:  
  
29. Those who strive for liberati on from old age and death, 
taking refuge in Me --- They realise in full that BRAHMAN, 
the whole knowledge of the Self and all action.  
Those who thus strive diligentl y to cleanse their hearts of 
their wrong tendencies and br ing their minds so purified 
for higher contemplation upon the Self, do so in order to 
gain "FREEDOM FROM OLD AGE AND DEATH." But 
the modern world is also striving to discover methods of 
arresting death and avoiding old age. However, this 
physical continuity of existe nce in the world is not the 
goal that has been hinted at he re in the Science of spiritual 
evolution.  
Birth, growth, disease, decay and death are the natural 
modifications that come to every man, or being, living in a 
given manifestation to the ripe old age of its full existence. 
Such modifications as expe riences of change are the 
agonising sources of all pains in  life. But for this change, a 
complete and unbroken happiness could be our lot. The 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
559 
 
attempt of a spiritual seeker, in his meditation upon the 
Self, is to get over all his identifications with the realm of 
change, and the entire province of change is indicated by 
these two familiar terms "OLD AGE AND DEATH."  
Such a true meditator, meditating upon the Self, comes to 
realise his identity with the Conscious Principle in him, 
the Self. The Self in the individual ( Atman) is the Eternal 
Truth, which is the Substrat um for the whole universe 
(Brahman). To realise the Self is to become Brahman, since 
the Self in the individual is the One Self everywhere. This 
non-duality of the Truth is implied here in this stanza 
when it declares that "THOSE WHO MEDITATE UPON 
ME, THE SELF, COME TO 'KNOW BRAHMAN."  
That the man of realisation is  not therefore an impotent 
fool in worldly transactions, has been clearly brought out 
here, when Krishna says that  the Perfected One not only 
realises the All-pervading Self, but at once comprehends 
"THE WORKING OF THE PSYCHOLOGICAL FORCES 
(ADHYATMA) IN HIM AND BECOMES PROFICIENT IN 
ALL ACTIVITIES (KARMA)." It is very well realised by all 
men of experience, that he alone can serve the world who 
has a full and complete knowledge of the psychology of 
the world, and also has a pe rfect control over his own 
mind. A man of harmonious perfection is the fittest 
instrument to sing the Song  of Truth, and such an 
individual must be the best integrated personality, smart 
and efficient in all activities.  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
560 
 
CONTINUING THE SAME IDEA AND EXPRESSING 
HOW A MAN OF WISDOM  IS A MAN OF ALL 
KNOWLEDGE AND ALL EFFICIENCY, KRISHNA 
DECLARES:  
  
30. Those who know Me with the ADHIBHUTA (pertaining to 
elements; the world-of-objects) , ADHIDAIVA (pertaining to 
the gods; the sense-organs) and the ADHIYAJNA (pertaining 
to the sacrifice; all perceptions)  , even at the time of death, 
steadfast in mind, know Me.  
Not only that the man of realisation understands all the 
vagaries of the mind and the nature of all activities, but he 
also gains a perfect knowledge of the world-of-objects 
(Adhibhuta), the secrets behind the workings of the sense-
organs, mind, and intellect ( Adhidaiva), and the conditions 
under which all perceptions --- physical, mental and 
intellectual (Adhiyajna) can best take place.  
The common idea that a man- of-God is an impractical 
man, inefficient to live a succe ssful life in the world, may 
be true as far as a dedicate d devotee of a particular god-
form, or a prophet, is concerned. The Upasaka is one who 
is so fully engrossed with his emotions and thoughts, 
dedicated to the Lord of his heart, that he has neither the 
interest nor the capacity to know the ways of the world. 
But the man-of-Perfection, as conceived by the Science of 
Vedanta, is not only a man of experience in the realm of 
Spirit, but he is also, at all times, on all occasions, under all 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
561 
 
situations, a master of himsel f, and a dynamic force to be 
reckoned with.  
He essentially becomes the leader  of the world, as he is a 
master of his own mind, as well as the minds of the entire 
living kingdom. To him, thereafter, everything becomes 
clear, and such a Man-of-Perfe ction lives in the world as 
God in his Knowledge of th e worlds, both within and 
without.  
In short, the chapter closes wi th a total assertion that "HE 
WHO KNOWS ME KNOWS EVERYT HING"; he is the 
man who will guide the destinies of the world, not only in 
his own times, but in the days  to come, as Lord Krishna 
Himself did.  
These two closing stanzas of this chapter do not of 
themselves explain all the terms used in them. They 
represent a summary of the following chapter. In a Shastra 
this is one of the traditional methods in the art of 
connecting two consecutive chapters together. In the form 
of mantras, these two stanzas indica te the contents and the 
theme of the following chapter.  
Thus, in the UPANISHADS of the glorious Bhagawad Geeta, 
in the Science of the Eternal, in the Scripture of YOGA, in the 
dialogue between Shri Krishna and Arjuna, the seventh 
discourse ends entitled: THE YOGA OF KNOWLEDGE 
AND WISDOM 
 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
562 
 
Vedantic ideologies, preached in the Upanishads had 
become, by the time of Vyasa, mere speculative narrations 
of poetic perfection, divorced from the actualities of life. 
The Hindus, thus estranged from the essential glory and 
strength of their culture, were to be resurrected by 
showing them the particular beauty and fire that lie 
concealed in the philosophic al speculations. In this 
chapter, Krishna has emphasized and indicated beyond all 
doubt, how Vedantic perfection can be achieved and lived 
to the glory of the successful se eker and to the blessing of 
the generation in which he liv es. It is most appropriate, 
therefore, that the chapter is entitled "THE YOGA OF 
KNOWLEDGE AND WISDOM."  
Mere knowledge is of no particular use. Wisdom is the 
glow that knowledge imparts to the individual. The 
fulfilment of knowledge in an individual is possible only 
when he becomes a Man-of-Wisdom. Knowledge can be 
imparted, but Wisdom cannot be given. The philosophical 
portion of all religions provides the knowledge, the 
instructional section of all re ligions provides techniques 
by which knowledge can be assimilated and digested into 
the very texture of the devotees' inner lives, and thereby 
every religion seeks to create Men-of-Wisdom, who have 
fulfilled their lives, justified their religion, and blessed 
their generation.  
Om Om Om Om Om 
 
 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
563 
 
 
 
 
