Chapter 4
Jnana Karma Sanyasa Yoga 
 
The Yoga of Renunciation of Action with 
Knowledge 
 
 
The Blessed Lord said: 1. I taught this Imperishable YOGA to 
Vivasvan; Vivasvan taught it to Manu; Manu taught it to 
Ikshvaku.  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
257 
 
As we said in our introduction to this chapter, the Lord is 
making an open statement, th at what He had been saying 
so far was nothing other than an intelligent reiteration of 
what is the content of the immortal Vedas. Inspired by a 
Divine remembrance, the Lord declares that He Himself, 
at the very beginning of creation, imparted the Knowledge 
of the Vedas to the Sun, and later on, the Sun-god 
conveyed it to his son, Ma nu, the ancient law-giver of 
India. Manu, in his turn, declared it to Ikshvaku, the 
ancestor of the Solar-dynasty that ruled over Ayodhya for 
a long period of time.  
The word " Veda" is derived from the root Vid, "to know"; 
Veda, therefore, means 'Knowledge.' The 'Knowledge' of 
divinity lurking in man and the technique by which it can 
be brought out to full manifestation are the theme of the 
Veda text-books, and the Truth of this theme is eternal.  
Just as we can say that electricity is eternal, as there was 
electricity even before the first scientist discovered it, and 
electrical energy will not be exhausted because of our 
forgetfulness of its existence, so too the divine nature of 
man will never be destroyed be cause of our non-assertion 
of it. The knowledge of the divine content and its 
possibilities in man are indeed eternal.  
The creation of the universe , it is accepted even by 
modern science, must have st arted with the Sun. As the 
source of all energy, the Sun was the first of the created 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
258 
 
objects, and with its very creation, this Great Knowledge 
of the Self was given out to the world.  
The theme of Vedic literature being the subjective divinity, 
language fails to express it completely. No deep 
experience can be exhaustively expressed in words. 
Therefore a study of the scriptures by one's own self is apt 
to create misunderstandings in  the mind of the student, 
rather than a right appreciation  of it. Thus it is a time-
honoured tradition in India that spiritual lessons are 
directly heard from a true Master, who has vivid inner 
experiences in the realm of the Spirit. It has been handed 
down from Master to discipl e and we have been given 
here the identity of the earliest students of Brahma-Vidya.  
  
2. This knowledge, handed down thus in regular succession, the 
royal sages knew. This YOGA, by long lapse of time, has been 
lost here, O Parantapa (burner of the foes) .  
This Yoga, the Yoga in which the Vedic teachings regarding 
activity ( Pravritti) and retirement ( Nivritti) are 
comprehended, thus handed do wn in regular succession 
among the "Royal sages," has its own destinies. At certain 
periods of history, this Knowledge seems to be readily 
available for the service of mankind, but at certain other 
periods of history it falls into disuse and becomes, as it 
were defunct. The golden era of spirituality dies down to 
inaugurate the dark ages of undivine life. At such periods 
of monstrous materialism, th e generation is not left in 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
259 
 
neglect to suffer and groan un der its own negative values. 
For, at that time, some great master appears on the 
horizon to inspire, to encourage and to lead the generation 
away from the ruts of sorrow onto the highroads of 
cultural revival.  
Krishna rightly evaluates the period of the Mahabharata 
and declares: "THIS YOGA, BY LONG LAPSE OF TIME, 
HAS BEEN LOST HERE."  
SEEING THAT THE " YOGA" HAD BEEN LOST BY 
FALLING INTO THE HANDS OF THE WEAK, WHO 
COULD NOT CONTROL THEIR SENSES, AND SEEING 
THAT THE GENERATION HAD NOT BEEN ABLE TO 
ATTAIN THE OBJECT OF LIFE, THE LORD ADDS THE 
FOLLOWING:  
  
3. That same ancient "YOGA" has been to-day taught to you by 
Me, for you are My devotee and My friend. This is a Supreme 
secret.  
With a direct statement in the style of an open confession, 
Krishna is here removing all possible misgivings of the 
orthodox, by insisting that the Truth he has declared in 
the last chapter... Karma Yoga... is nothing other than the 
same ancient Yoga.  
A Master can feel really inspired and instruct efficiently, 
only when he establishes a certain type of affectionate 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
260 
 
rapport with the students. Krishna finds that his friend 
Arjuna is fully devoted to Hi m, and that he will certainly 
follow the "Path" indicated by Him. The relationship 
between teacher and taught should not be a mere 
commercial arrangement of "yo u-pay-and-I-teach." Mind 
and intellect blossom forth only in a warmer climate of 
love and freedom, friendship and mutual understanding. 
These qualities required for a healthy transference of the 
subjective knowledge were found in full measure in 
Arjuna and therefore, Krishna says 'I taught you' this Yoga 
in the earlier chapter.  
The secrecy mentioned here on ly indicates that a man, 
however wise he might be, may not come to suspect the 
existence of the Atman in himself without being so advised 
by a man of Experience. The Self being that which is 
beyond the intellect, (III-41) the reasoning capacity in a 
man cannot come to suspect the existence of an Eternal, 
Changeless, Conscious Principle, subtler than the intellect, 
ever illumining the thoughts rising in the very intellect. 
Hence, this Science of Truth is  called here as the Supreme 
secret."  
IN ORDER NOT TO LEAVE IN ANYBODY'S MIND AN 
IMPRESSION THAT ANY INCONSISTENT 
STATEMENT HAS BEEN MADE BY THE LORD, 
ARJUNA ASKS, AS THOUGH RAISING AN 
OBJECTION:  
  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
261 
 
Arjuna said: 4. Later was Your birth, and prior was the birth of 
Vivaswan (Sun) ; how am I to understand that You taught this 
YOGA in the beginning?  
There is a palpable anachronism in the opening stanza of 
this chapter. Krishna says that he taught this Eternal Truth 
to Lord Sun in the beginning  of creation. It was quite 
natural for Arjuna to think of Krishna as the son of 
Devaki, the Flute-bearer of Gokula. To Arjuna, his 
charioteer Krishna had a defini t e  d a t e  o f  b i r t h ,  a n d  w a s  
only his own contemporary. Therefore, Krishna Himself 
could not have advised the Sun, who, by all calculations, 
is the one who manifested in nature much earlier than all 
the planetary worlds.  
TO REMOVE FROM THE MINDS OF THE HASTY 
READERS THE POSSIBLE MISUNDERSTANDING 
THAT KRISHNA, THE SON OF DEVAKI, IS THE 
SPEAKER OF THE GEETA, VYASA MAKES THE 
BLESSED LORD DECLARE THE FOLLOWING:  
  
The Blessed Lord said: 5. Many birt hs of Mine have passed as 
well as yours, O Arjuna; I know them all but you know them 
not, O Parantapa (scorcher of foes) .  
The scriptural masters of the Hindus exhibit an infinite 
amount of patience and un derstanding, which almost 
amounts to an intellectual daring, and they readily come 
out to satisfy all possible doubts of all the students. Here 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
262 
 
we find Krishna trying to explain how He was the very 
Infinite in His Real Nature and that He had Himself, in the 
very beginning of creation, given out Brahma-Vidya to 
Lord Sun.  
In this section we find an exhaustive discussion of the 
"theory of incarnation" ( Avatara), as propounded in the 
Pauranic literature. To many foreigners, this portion of the 
Hindu philosophy and belief has been very confusing, and 
many of them have expressed such opinions about it; and, 
perhaps, none has put it so vehemently as Max Mueller.  
But, when we try to understand it with a sufficient 
background of the Vedantic concept of creation, it is not 
very difficult for us to follo w the idea. We have elsewhere 
explained in the "Fall of Ma n" how, when the Infinite 
Reality functions through 'unactivity' ( Sattwa), we have 
the concept of the God-Principle. Later on in this section, 
Krishna Himself explains how He, in all freedom, takes 
upon Himself the matter-envelopments and plays the 
game of the Immortal among the mortals --- but all the 
time Himself being ever conscious of His own complete 
Divine Nature.  
Not a single mortal embodiment can be the result of sheer 
accident. Every man comes to the field of the world only 
as a result of his evolutionary progress, even according to 
the Darwinian theory. Each embodied life indicates a long 
autobiography of that ego, and it is only after a long chain 
of existence in different forms that it has at last reached its 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
263 
 
present destination. In each  life, as soon as the ego 
expresses itself in its given fiel d of activity, it, fortunately, 
forgets the entire past, and carri es with it only a distinct 
flavour ( vasana) thereof. But a Master-mind like Lord 
Krishna, in His Divine Omniscience, understands that 
both He and Arjuna had been through many vicissitudes 
of existence, and that "I  KNOW THEM ALL WHILE YOU 
KNOW THEM NOT."  
"HOW THEN CAN YOU, THE ETERNAL LORD, HAVE 
A BIRTH IN THE ABSENCE OF DHARMA AND 
ADHARMA?" LISTEN:  
  
6. Though I am unborn and am of imperishable nature, and 
though I am the Lord of all beings, yet, ruling over My own 
Nature, I take birth by My own MAYA.  
Here is the most daring and original thought of Vyasa, we 
may say, throughout the entire Geeta. The Supreme, on 
account of His unquestioned freedom, by His own 
perfectly free will, takes upon Himself the conditioning of 
matter, and manifests Himself in a particular embodiment 
in the world, for serving the deluded generation of that 
time. To the Lord, His 'igno rance'is but a pose assumed, 
not a fact lived. A mortal becomes victimised by his 
Avidya, while the Lord is Master of His Maya. A driver is 
bound by his duty to the vehicle, while the owner of the 
vehicle is Lord of it. He uses  the vehicle for his purposes, 
and whenever he reaches his immediate destination, he 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
264 
 
leaves the vehicle with all freedom, and enjoys his own 
independent activities. But, the poor driver, bound to the 
vehicle, will have to guard it against intruders and serve 
the vehicle as its servant.  The Lord uses the matter-
envelopments and their limitations as a convenience and 
as a set of necessary tools in  His game of protecting the 
creation.  
Thus, though the Lord is Unborn and Changeless in His 
Nature, and ever a Lord of matter, yet, keeping His Maya 
perfectly under His own control, He comes into the world, 
through His own free will. All the time He is fully 
conscious of His own Divine  status and unchallenged 
p r e r o g a t i v e .  H e  d o e s  n o t  c o m e  i n t o  b e i n g  a s  o t h e r s  d o ,  
compelled by His past Karma, to live here in the world 
under the thraldom of Nature. He is not bound by His 
mental temperaments but He is ever free from the 
mischiefs of His own Maya.  
You ask your servant to take your heavy motor-cycle to 
the nearby garage for refilling it. If you watch him doing it 
you will have some idea of what the Lord is trying to 
express here. To that poor man, the unwieldy machine is a 
calamity, a suffering. To push it across the road is a risky 
adventure for him, because the machine, by its own 
weight, guides him, he being powerless to assert his 
mastery over it. On the other hand, if you yourself were to 
ride, or push, the motor-cycle, you can joyously, and 
easily, do so. The vehicle re maining the same, in your 
hands it becomes a slave to carry you, while the poor 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
265 
 
servant was being dragged by the clumsy weight of the 
heavy machine!  
To an ordinary man who is ignorant of the working of his 
vehicle, it becomes a painful agony and a difficult 
responsibility to make use of  these instruments. To the 
Lord, the world is no problem, and His personal 
equipments and their appetites are always perfectly under 
His own control. He comes to lord over every situation.  
This perfect freedom of a God-man could not have been 
more beautifully brought out in  so few words as in these 
incomparable lines.  
"WHEN AND FOR WHAT PURPOSE IS THE INFINITE 
SO BOUND?".. THE ANSWER FOLLOWS:  
  
7. Whenever there is a decay of righteousness, O Bharata, and a 
rise of unrighteousness, then I manifest Myself.  
"Whenever there is a decline of Dharma, I create for Myself 
a body." The term Dharma has already been exhaustively 
explained. Dharma,  " T h e  L a w  o f  B e i n g "  i s  a  s a c r e d  t r u t h ,  
and when the majority of the members of a community do 
not obey this great Truth, there is a conquest of the world 
by a herd of biped-animals, and not a co-operative 
happily-living family of men, pursuing life in their full 
dignity as intelligent social beings. In all such dark 
periods of history, some gr eat Master comes to present 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
266 
 
himself as the leader of men to revive 'the-standard-of-life' 
and its moral values. This is generally done, not only by 
giving a fillip to the existing nobler values, but also by a 
corresponding policy of total elimination of the wicked.  
It is for this purpose that th e Infinite, from time to time, 
wears the "matter-apparel" and appears on the scene of 
activity, like the owner of an estate, who now and then 
puts on his gumboots to inspect and reorganise his estate. 
Even while he is on the work -spot, in the burning sun, 
among his workers, he is conscious of his lordship over, 
and ownership of, the entire estate. Similarly, the 
Supreme, which is the subs tratum for the pluralistic 
world, puts on the body-gown and, as it were, walks into 
the dusky atmosphere of the immoral life of mankind, for 
the purpose of re-organising and conducting a thorough 
spring-cleaning of the bosom of man.  
In the descent of God explained here, it is very clearly said 
that the Lord takes upon Himself, a body, projected for 
the purpose by Himself, and that He reserves for Himself 
the Divine freedom to be IN it, and yet not OF it: "THEN I 
BODY MYSELF FORTH."  
FOR WHAT PURPOSE ?  
  
8. For the protection of the g ood, for the destruction of the 
wicked and for the establishment of rightenousness, I am born in 
every age.  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
267 
 
It is quite evident that the Infinite cannot project Itself 
forth unless there is some "des ire." The State of Desireless-
ness is but the State of Actionless-ness. Without some 
equipment or the other, electricity cannot, of its own 
accord, manifest itself. Similarly, the Supreme cannot, and 
need not project out into a Divine, or an undivine form --- 
as an Immortal Omniscient God or as a mortal foolish ego 
--- unless there is some desire, or the other, to precipitate 
the manifestation A super-saturated solution, if left alone, 
undisturbed, can carry its extra quantity of crystals in 
itself; but the moment a minu test particle of the same 
substance is thrown into that  beaker, immediately, all the 
extra crystals get thrown out in crystal-form. Similarly, the 
Dynamic Supreme, the Womb of Infinite potentialities, 
cannot bring forth any form, or forms, unless there is an 
intention --- it may be Divine, it may be good, it may be 
bad.  
Then the DESIRE that made  the Supreme assume the 
Divine form of Krishna --- the Enchanting Cowboy, the 
Blue Lover-of-All-is here explained in Vyasa's own words. 
In the stanza, Vyasa makes Kr ishna confess His initial 
"desire," that caused His manifestation.  
The divinest of all "desires" is, indeed, a selfless thirst to 
serve the world; but all the sa me it is a DESIRE. In order 
to "PROTECT THE GOOD," when the Absolute starts ITs 
Godly career, it is the very necessity of Maya that He, the 
very Lord of Delusion, has to take upon Himself one more 
added mission," THE DESTRUCTION OF THE WICKED."  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
268 
 
Here 'DESTRUCTION' is not annihilation of the 
individuals as much as the REMOVAL OF THE WRONG 
TENDENCIES in the individuals. It is a process of refitting 
the wardrobe wherein some ol d clothes are irredeemably 
spoiled, and have to be eliminated in order to make more 
space for newly-made and other refitted items. Similarly, 
Prophets, when they come, they encourage the good, 
sometimes they rejuvenate th e bad, and often eliminate 
the poisonous specimens from the garden-of-life.  
This much Lord Krishna was compelled to explain about 
Himself because it was perfec tly evident that Arjuna was 
b l i s s f u l l y  u n a w a r e  o f  t h e  t r u e  D i v i n e  n a t u r e  o f  K r i s h n a .  
The line of arguments adopted by Arjuna in the opening 
chapter to justify his conduct in his friend's eyes would be 
meaningless if Arjuna did not, in fact, believe that he was 
addressing a human being. It would, in such a case, 
suggest that Arjuna was an utter atheist who would not 
rely for his victory upon hi s Divine companion. All the 
same, when Krishna comments upon Arjuna, 
characterising him as a non-caviller, a friend and a 
devotee, deserving His assistance, Arjuna appeals to 
Krishna, with a childlike simplicity: "DO TEACH ME, I 
AM THY DISCIPLE." This was un deniably an attitude of 
profound respect but no indi cation that Arjuna treated 
Krishna as God-Almighty, Himself.  
WHY IS THE LORD GIVING THIS BIT OF HIS 
AUTOBIOGRAPHY?  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
269 
 
  
9. He who thus knows, in true light, My divine birth and action, 
having abandoned the body, he is not born again; he comes to 
Me, O Arjuna.  
After explaining the how and the why of incarnations in 
general, Krishna declares that those who, by constant 
contemplation upon this fact, understand the Divine birth 
and activities of the Lord, end their limitations and reach 
Godhood. That it is not a me re understanding or knowing 
that is indicated here is cl ear from the ve ry words, "IN 
TRUE LIGHT" ( Tattwatah), that is, we have to experience 
subjectively how and when the Supreme Atman takes Its 
Avatara in us. Today, no doubt,  individually, we live as 
limited mortal brutes, but, at  certain moments, when we 
are entertaining pure selfless "desires," the very same 
Spark-of-Life in us comes to manifest a divine potency 
and a celestial dash.  
The stanza also subtly indica tes that for one's spiritual 
development, the practice of Upasana of the blissful form 
of the Lord is as efficient a method as meditation upon the 
formless-Self. There are some professional Vedantins who 
cannot accept the concept of the Lord having an 
embodiment. They are merely barking at a shadow. To 
one who is practising sincerely and whole-heatedly, the 
goal is equally available whether it is through the Upasana 
of the Truth with a form ( Saguna), or without any form 
(Nirguna).  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
270 
 
Krishna is indicating here the Supreme State-of-Perfection, 
the State-of-Existence from where "ONE IS NOT BORN 
AGAIN." In the earlier Vedic literature the State-of-
Godhood is described as the "State-of-Deathless-ness" 
(Amaratva), while in the later Vedic literature we find a 
slow change-over, and the Eternal is explained as the State 
from which "ONE IS NOT BORN AGAIN" ( Ajah). The 
evolution of this concept clearly indicates the intellectual 
development in this country at  that time. When a society 
is immature, its members are afraid of death; but as they 
grow and evolve, it is not death that frightens them so 
much as the possibility of a new birth, for, it starts a new 
lease of agonising existence in imperfect environments.  
It is evident that the 'State-of-Deathless-ness' is itself the 
'State-of-Birthless-ness,' because death can come only to 
that which is born. And yet,  the change in expression 
declares the maturity that was gained by the Vedic-
students of that period.  
THIS PATH OF SALVATION IS NOT ONE MERELY 
REASONED OUT BY KRISHNA TO SUIT HIS PRESENT 
PURPOSE, BUT IT WAS WALKED EVEN IN ANCIENT 
TIMES:  
  
10. Freed from attachment, fear and anger, absorbed in Me, 
taking refuge in Me, purified by the Fire-of-Knowledge, many 
have attained My Being.  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
271 
 
The entire "Path-of-Self-devel opment" and the final Goal 
that is to be reached have been indicated in this stanza. 
Without renouncing attachme nt and its by-products, 
which always disturb one's mental equipoise, no progress 
is ever possible for a seeker. Once this mental discipline is 
gained, absorbed in the idea of  Self-perfection, the seeker 
comes to take total refuge in this great victory. Thereafter, 
the mission of Self-perfectio n becomes a passion with him 
to thrill his life. When an individual has thus gained this 
stage of Self-development, he becomes fit for the study 
and practice of  
the great scriptures --- the Upanishads.  
(a) The study of the scriptures at the feet of a Master, 
followed by (b) independent analysis of Vedantic Truths 
by oneself in an attempt to understand their real import, 
and lastly, (c) the seeker's slow and steady attempt at 
balancing himself in single-pointed meditation --- all these 
three together constitute the technique of Self-
development as visualised in Hinduism. A study of the 
theory of Vedanta and all our attempts to live the life of 
tranquillity and love indicated therein, together constitute 
Jnana Tapas.  
There are some commentators who read into the stanza a 
synthesis of all the three "Paths." The "Path-of-Action" is 
indicated in the first-half of the first line, because, unless 
one trains oneself in the fi eld of activity, "DETACHMENT 
FROM DESIRES, FEAR, AND ANGER" cannot be gained. 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
272 
 
The second-half, "ABSORBED IN ME AND TAKING 
REFUGE IN ME" indicates the "Path-of-Love," wherein the 
devotee, binding himself with love to the 'Lord of his 
heart'lives his life, taking re fuge in nothing other than the 
Lord. The "Path-of-Knowledge" is indicated by the 
discriminative analysis and the constant and continued 
attempts at identification with the Self ( Jnana Tapas). The 
import is, that seekers walkin g all the seemingly different 
"Paths" reach but the same Goal, the Supreme, "Me."  
In fact, these three "Paths," are but three different 
techniques to perfect our mind; all spiritual paths are but 
attempts to purify the mind, meaning, to make it steady 
and single-pointed. Some of us identify ourselves more 
with our bodies than with an ything else. Others are, by 
temperament, living more in their mental zones. And 
there are some again who live more in their rational 
personalities. To all these three types of seekers, if one and 
the same "path" is indicated,  the chances are that the 
technique prescribed will not be universal in its 
acceptance and application.  
But whatever be the "Path" pursued, and whatever be the 
type to which the seekers belong, the ultimate experience 
of Spiritual Perfection gained by every one of them at the 
moment of illumination, is on e and the same. This is an 
incontrovertible fact, for the mystical literature of the 
world reads as though every saint has borrowed and 
copied from all the earlier Masters across the world!  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
273 
 
THEN LORD KRISHNA MUST BE CHERISHING 
FEELINGS OF AFFECTION AND AVERSION, SINCE HE 
LIBERATES SOME, AND NOT ALL. THE ANSWER 
FOLLOWS:  
  
11. It whatever way men approach Me, even so do I reward 
them; My path do men tread in all ways, O son of Pritha.  
Attachment and aversion are not the weaknesses of the 
Lord. He is a mass of Dynamism, the source of all 
activities and achievements. We are given the equipment 
through which we can, as we like, invoke this Infinite 
Mind. If we rightly invoke and carefully use the 
equipments, as a reward for our intelligent self-
application, we can reach the Go al of our activities. If we 
misuse them, the very same Divine Force can be the cause 
of our utter disaster.  
The fuel strength in the petrol can be converted into horse-
power through the mechanism under the bonnet. We can 
invoke the horse-power to re ach our destination, or we 
can easily dump ourselves into a mass of twisted 
wreckage on the way-side and become a bundle of broken 
bones. These accidents are caused by the carelessness of 
the driver, although the stre ngth and power with which 
the car dashes down the emba nkment of the road is, no 
doubt, supplied by the same petrol. But the strength in the 
petrol had no attachment for those whom it guided home 
safe. Nor can we say that it had a hatred  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
274 
 
for those whom it wrecked. With neither attachment nor 
hatred, the petrol gives its power when invoked through 
the mechanism of the engine, and how to make use of the 
power depends upon us and our wisdom in employing it.  
Similarly, here the Lord says, "I, AS LIFE, LEND MY 
POWER TO ALL WITHOUT ANY PARTIALITY; IN 
WHATEVER FORM THEY IN VOKE ME, IN THAT 
FORM I SERVE THEM." An electric plug in the house can 
be made use of to hear a song over the radio, to cool 
ourselves with the breeze of a fan, to boil water, to cook or 
to warm the room with a heater; it all depends upon what 
instrument we plug into it. It is never possible that 
electricity flowing through the fan, of its own accord, can 
start emitting fire or light. Similarly, the unmanifest 
Eternal Force of Life can be invoked, and It shall fulfil all 
"desires" through us according to the type of our 
invocations.  
IF GOD BE THUS FREE FROM ALL ATTACHMENTS 
AND OTHER EVIL PASSIONS, HE, THE LORD, MUST 
BE GRACIOUS TO ALL CREATURES ALIKE AND 
MUST BE ABLE TO GRANT THEM ALL THEIR 
DESIRES. THEN WHY IS IT THAT ORDINARILY MEN 
DO NOT DESIRE TO SEEK THE LORD AND GAIN THE 
INFINITE? --- LISTEN WHY IT IS SO;  
  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
275 
 
12. They who long for satisfaction  from actions in this world, 
make sacrifices to the gods; because satisfaction is quickly 
obtained from actions in the world-of-objects.  
If the Atmic-force guides us on both, the path-of-good and 
on the path-of-evil, then how is it that in this world of ours 
we see but a rare few who are hone stly trying to travel the 
path-of-rightenousness, while the majority are pursuing 
the road-of-evil? This question must necessarily come to 
the mind of all intelligent students, and Lord Krishna is 
answering this possible query. He says, whether the mind 
wants to pursue an extrovert life, or live the introvert joys, 
it can do so only by borrowi ng its capacity and capability 
from the Omnipotency of the Atman; but the mind ever 
chooses an extrovert career, in stinking sensuality, because 
it is easy to gain cheap pleasures by satisfying the 
sensuous ticklings of nerve-tips.  
This is the cause for sensuality in the world, and Krishna 
explains why a majority of us, inspite of our best efforts, 
live a life of animal passions: "BECAUSE SUCCESS 
RESULTING FROM ACTION IS QUICKLY ATTAINED  
IN THE HUMAN WORLD."  
On this globe of ours, the quickest results are gained when 
our sense-organs come in contact with their desired 
objects as the result of deliberate actions. Since a sensuous 
life is a life of least resistance, though of cheap  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
276 
 
pleasures, the ordinary man, in his keen appetite for joy 
and peace, wastes his spiritua l strength in hunting after, 
procuring, and enjoying the fleeting sense-objects. The 
truth of the statement is wel l within the experience of 
every one of us.  
The passage should not be understood only to say that 
worldly success is easily gain ed, but that, as men, we can 
intelligently plan our actions in such a way that we can, 
out of our actions, create or compel nature to yield a 
greater dose of happiness than the members of the 
vegetable and animal kingdoms.  
MEN WHO ARE SEEKING THE LOWER OR THE 
HIGHER WAYS OF LIFE THROUGH THE 
EMPLOYMENT OF THEIR SPIRITUAL STRENGTH CAN 
BE DIVIDED, UPON THE BROAD BASIS OF THEIR 
INTROVERT AND EXTROVERT NATURES; AND THE 
EXTROVERT MEN CAN AG AIN BE DIVIDED INTO 
FOUR TYPES, ON THE BASIS OF THEIR FINER 
DISTINCTIONS OF THE TEXTURES OF THEIR 
THOUGHT AND ACTION.  
  
13. The fourfold-caste has been c reated by Me according to the 
differentiation of GUNA an d KARMA; though I am the 
author thereof know Me as non-doer and immutable.  
This is a stanza that has b een much misused in recent 
times by the upholders of the social crime styled as the 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
277 
 
caste system in India. Varna, meaning different shades of 
texture, or colour, is employed here in the Yogic-sense. In 
the Yoga Shastra, they attribute some definite colours to 
the triple gunas, which mean, as we have said earlier, "the 
mental temperaments." Thus, Sattwa is considered as 
white, Rajas as red, and Tamas as black. Man is essentially 
the thoughts that he entertains. From individual to 
individual, even when the th oughts are superficially the 
same, there are clear distinctions recognizable from their 
temperaments.  
On the basis of these temperamental distinctions, the 
entire mankind has been, fo r the purpose of spiritual 
study, classified into four "castes" of Varnas. Just as, in a 
metropolis, on the basis of trade or professions, we divide 
the people as doctors, advocates, professors, traders, 
politicians, tongawalas, etc., so too, on the basis of the 
different textures of thoughts entertained by the 
intelligent creatures, the four "castes" had been labelled in 
the past. From the standpoint of the State, a doctor and a 
tongawala are as much important as an advocate and a 
mechanic. So too, for the perfec tly healthy life of a society, 
all "castes" should not be competitive but co-operative 
units, each being complementary to the others, never 
competing among themselves.  
However, later on, in the power politics of the early 
middle-ages in India, this communal feeling cropped up 
in its present ugliness, an d in the general ignorance 
among the ordinary people at that time, the cheap pandits 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
278 
 
could parade their assumed knowledge by quoting, IN 
BITS, stanzas like this one.  
The decadent Hindu- Brahmin found it very convenient to 
quote the first quarter of the stanza, and repeat "I 
CREATED THE FOUR varnas," and give this tragic social 
vivisection a divine look ha ving a godly sanction. They, 
who did this, were in fact, th e greatest blasphemers that 
Hinduism ever had to reckon with. For Vyasa, in the very 
same line of the couplet, as though in the very same 
breath, describes the basis on which this classification was 
made, when he says, "B Y THE DIFFERENTIATION OF 
THE MENTAL QUALITY AND PHYSICAL ACTION (OF 
THE PEOPLE)."  
This complete definition of the Varna not only removes 
our present misunderstanding but also provides us with 
some data to understand its true significance. Not by birth 
is man a Brahmana ( Brahmin); by cultivating good 
intentions and noble thoughts alone can we ever aspire to 
Brahmana-hood; nor can we pose as Brahmana merely 
because of our  
external physical marks, or bodily actions in the outer 
world. The definition insists that he alone is a Brahmana, 
whose thoughts are as much Sattwic, as his actions are. A 
Kshatriya is one who is Rajasic in his thoughts and actions. 
A Shudra is not only one whose thoughts are Tamasic, but 
also he who lives a life of low endeavours, for satisfying 
his base animal passions and flesh-appetites. The scientific 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
279 
 
attitude in which this definition has been declared, is clear 
from the exhaustive implications of the statement: 
"ACCORDING TO THE DIFFERENTIATION OF " guna" 
AND "karma."  
We had tried to explain how the Self, functioning through 
Its own self-forgetfulness ( Maya) as it were, came to 
project forth temperamentally in three distinct conditions 
of mental and intellectual life: Unactivity, Activity and 
Inactivity. Through these triple channels flow the 
expressions of Life manifesting the different ideas, 
agitations and actions of the embodied-Life. None of the 
vagaries of existence would have been possible if the 
equipments were not tickled by the touch-of-Life.  
Krishna, as the very Source of Life, emphatically asserts 
here, that He is the author of it all, in the sense that the 
ocean could say that it is the author of all the waves, 
ripples, foam, bubbles, etc., and gold can assert that it is 
the very creator and sustainer of all gold-ornaments in the 
world, inasmuch as no gold -ornament can exist when the 
gold element is removed from it.  
But, at the same time the In finite, being All-Pervading, as 
we have already explained, cannot participate in any 
action and therefore, the Lord, in one and the same breath, 
declares that though "HE IS THE AUTHOR OF IT," in His 
own Real Nature," HE IS AT THE SAME TIME A NON-
DOER."  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
280 
 
Such contradictions in Vedanta become confusing to the 
students, as long as they are not initiated into the 
SECRETS OF ITS STUDY. In our conversation, we 
generally hear people say "that they reached their 
destination ten miles away by si tting in a bus;" "I caught a 
train and reached here." Sinc e we understand it in our 
usual routine conversation, we do not try to dissect such 
statements to discover the contradictions they contain. 
Sitting you cannot travel. By catching a train, none can 
cover distances. And yet it is so true. When we travel in a 
bus or a train, we donot move; we only sit and hang on to 
our seats! But stillwe cover the distance because the 
vehicle in which we sit, move s on. In other words, the 
motion of the vehicle is attributed to us. Similarly, the 
creation of the temperaments, which should be attributed 
to the mind and intellect, is attributed to the Lord. In fact, 
the Lord, in His Essential Nature, being Changeless and 
All-Pervading, is neither the Doer nor the Creator.  
SINCE I AM NOT IN REALITY THE AUTHOR OF 
THOSE ACTIONS OF WHICH YOU THINK ME TO BE 
AN AUTHOR:  
  
14. Actions do not taint Me, nor ha ve I any desire for the fruits-
of-actions. He who knows Me thus is not bound by his actions.  
The Ever-pure and the All-full cannot be tainted, nor can 
It have any sense-of-imperfection which can germinate 
any "desire." The Lord, the Self, declares here: "ACTIONS 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
281 
 
DO NOT TAINT ME NOR HAVE I ANY ANXIETY FOR 
THE FRUITS OF ACTIONS." Taint or "desire" can come 
only to an ego, which is "t he Self, functioning through a 
given mind and intellect." When the subtle-body is tainted 
by "desires" and agitations then  the ego in it seems to be 
played upon by these two. This is better understood by 
the following analogy.  
The sun, reflected in a bowl of water, is entirely 
dependent upon the condition of the water. The reflected-
sun is shaken when the water in the bowl is disturbed and 
it appears to be dim when the water is muddy. Neither the 
dimness nor the agitations of the reflection have caused 
any change at all in the origin al object --- the sun in the 
Infinite Heavens. Similarly, the ego suffers the evil 
tendencies and such other taints  of the mind and also gets 
disturbed, due to the "desir es" for the FRUITS OF ITS 
ACTIONS. The Self, in Its Pure Conscious-nature, is not at 
all affected by these delusory disturbances of Its own 
reflection in the mental pool.  
THIS SEEMS TO BE A NOVEL INTERPRETATION OF 
THE USUAL VEDIC TECHNIQUE OF SELF-
PERFECTION. IS THERE ANY PRECEDENT?... LISTEN:  
  
15. Having known this, the anci ent seekers-after- freedom also 
performed action; therefore, you too perform action, as did the 
ancients in the olden times.  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
282 
 
After knowing Me that "I AM NON-AGENT AND I 
HAVE NO LONGING FOR THE FRUITS OF ACTIONS," 
and realising the All-full Self-hood, there shall no more be 
any "desire" or "egoistic vanities." The technique of Karma 
Yoga, as enunciated and propounded in the last chapter, 
was practised, says Krishna, even in olden times by many 
an intelligent seeker. In short, there is nothing new in the 
"Path-of-Action" and all seekers trying to realise the Self 
had been following the same technique.  
"IF 'KARMA YOGA' IS TO BE PERFORMED, I CAN DO IT 
BECAUSE OF YOUR ADVICE. BUT WHY SHOULD YOU 
ADD THAT THE ANCIENTS DID THE SAME?" IN 
REPLY TO THIS THE LORD SAYS: "LISTEN, THERE IS 
GREAT DIFFICULTY IN UNDERSTANDING WHAT 
CONSTITUTES RIGHT ACTION"... HOW?  
  
16. What is action? What is inaction? As to this even the 
"wise" are deluded. Therefore, I shall teach you "action" (the 
nature of action and inaction) , knowing which, you shall be 
liberated from the evil (of SAMSARA --- the wheel of birth and 
death) .  
All of us understand that 'ACTION' means movement of 
the limbs with relation to th ings in the outer world, and 
'INACTION' means a state of existence wherein there is a 
total cessation of such vigorous and conscious 
movements. This is the popular definition of 'action' and 
'inaction' which, no doubt, is quite acceptable as far as the 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
283 
 
every-day activities of life are concerned. But from the 
philosophical stand-point, th e concept and features of 
both 'action' and 'inaction' change.  
For purposes of self-development, when we consider 
'action,' it is not to be valued merely by observing its 
manifested qualities but we must also take into 
consideration the un-manifested but subtly-working 
motives behind the very same action. An action, in itself, 
c a n n o t  b e  c o n s i d e r e d  e i t h e r  a s  g o o d  o r  b a d .  I t  i s  t h e  
MOTIVE BEHIND IT which dete rmines the quality of the 
action. Just as the beauty of a fr uit is not the last word for 
its edibility, but it depends upon its contents, so too, a 
beautiful action in itself could be a poisonous act of 
criminality, if the motive behind it is low and vicious.  
Therefore, it is said that, in  discriminating between what 
is 'action' and what is 'inaction,' "EVEN THE POET-SEERS 
OF OLD ARE CONFUSED." The word ' Kavi,' now-a-days 
mainly used for the poets, was the name for the Rishis, the 
Seers of Upanishadic declarations. Any inspired man, 
recognising and expressing a truth that was noble and 
immortal, was called a Kavi.  
After stating this difficult  problem of discriminating 
between 'action' and 'inaction,' Krishna promises here that 
He will teach Arjuna what exac tly constitutes right action, 
by knowing which, naturally, one can save one's self from 
all evil.  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
284 
 
IT IS FAMILIAR TO ALL, THAT ACTION MEANS 
MOVEMENT, AND INACTION MEANS ABSENCE OF 
IT: TO SIT QUIET. WHAT IS  THERE TO LEARN ABOUT 
THEM?  
  
17. For verily (the true nature) of "right action" should be 
known; also (that) of "forbidde n (or unlawful) action" and of 
"inaction" ; imponderable is the nature (path) of action.  
Life means activity. Where activity has ended, death has 
entered. In active life alone can we progress or deteriorate. 
A stagnant pool of water deca ys and soon gets putrefied; 
while the flowing water of a river ever keeps itself fresh, 
pure and clean.  
Life being dynamic, it cannot, even for a moment, cease to 
function. Complete cessation fr om activities is impossible 
so long as life exists.  
Activity, therefore, is the very corner-stone of life. Since 
man must always actively exist all his lifetime, the entire 
possibilities of activities have been taken into 
consideration by the great Seer s of old in evaluating life. 
The accompanying chart will vividly explain their 
classifications.  
Life is constituted of moments of activity and moments of 
inactivity. Through inactivi ty, neither progress nor 
deterioration is ever possible. Deep-sleep or periods of 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
285 
 
complete cessation in existence are intervals of total 
holidaying from life, and th ey can neither make nor 
marthe individual's progress in his evolution.  
Periods of activity create man. This creative-period 
depends upon what type of  activity we venture upon. 
According to the ancient Seers, activities can be of two 
types, constructive or destructive. Constructive activities 
which contribute towards the evolution of the individual 
are termed here as Karma.  
Destructive activities are those that are totally condemned 
by the Shastras, because they tend to devolve the 
individual, and those are termed in our text books as Vi-
karma. The constructive activities ( Karma) can be of three 
kinds: Nitya --- constant duties, Naimittika --- special 
duties on special occasions, and Kamya --- work 
purposeful and self-determined for winning a desirable 
result or reward.  
Built upon the ancient Vedic doctrine, Krishna here 
expounds an elaborate theory  of self-development. He 
says that life is but a name for continuous activities. These 
activities can fall within two distinct classifications as 
Karma and Vi-karma. Lord Krishna's advice to Arjuna is to 
avoid the forbidden actions ( Vi-karma) and to pursue the 
constructive and creative activities of self-development 
(Karma). In this scientific analysis, without any formality, 
or mental reservation, Krishna totally rejects "inactivity" 
(A-karma).  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
286 
 
It is necessary, it is said he re, that a true seeker who is 
trying to live a diligent life, contributing to his material 
progress and to his spiritual self-development, must 
necessarily know this triple classification of life, 
considered as a bundle  
of activities.  
Even after so beautifully defining the three clear and 
distinct classifications, Kr ishna admits that, for an 
ordinary man it is not easy to  distinguish the one from the 
other, and to readily and successfully classify all his 
activities under these three headings, because, Krishna 
says, "THE NATURE OF KARMA IS IMPONDERABLE. "  
In this statement lies the secret suggestion that an action is 
to be evaluated not merely on its face value but after a 
sincere consideration of the motive working behind it. If 
the motive, or desire, or intention of one is pure and 
constructive, then the action too is noble and meritorious 
for that particular individual. Since in this evaluation of 
actions the individual factor is so very predominant, one 
must agree with Krishna over the imponderability of the 
nature of Karma.  
WHAT IS THERE TO LEARN ABOUT ACTION AND 
INACTION? THE ANSWER FOLLOWS:  
  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
287 
 
18. He who recognises inaction in ac tion and action in inaction 
is wise among men; he is a YOGI and a true performer of all 
actions.  
By thus following the rules of right-living ( Karma), as 
indicated in Vedanta, when an individual has lived a 
sufficiently long period of time, the doubt arises as to 
when exactly we can say that he has completely reached 
the State of Perfection. This question should necessarily 
throb in the intellect of all sincere students, and Krishna is 
trying to indicate this noble goal of fulfilment of all Karmas 
in this stanza.  
Action, as we have already seen , is a gross expression in 
the outer world of some kn own, or unknown, deep 
"desire" in the intellect. A complete "STATE OF 
ACTIONLESS-NESS" would be necessarily the 'STATE OF 
DESIRELESS-NESS" or the "STATE OF INFINITE GOD-
HEAD." But the goal indicated here is not this "STATE OF 
INFINITE PERFECTION," but only a wayside station on 
the pilgrimage. A true and diligent man can discover and 
recognise in himself that even in physical inaction there 
can be an intense mental and intellectual activity, and he 
can also recognise that he, even in the most intense 
activities, himself as an obse rver of it, is revelling in 
"unactivity" (A-Karma). This is the maximum Sattwic state.  
Such an individual has thereby reached a State of Great 
Equanimity, which is almost unavoidable in living a 
successful life of meditation. It is not said here, as it is 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
288 
 
usually believed, that right acti on itself will take us to the 
Infinite. This is impossible. As  action itself is a child of 
"desire," through action alone we can create things; and 
created 'results' are, in their very nature, finite. Thus, a 
God-head reached through acti vity can only be a Sunday-
God-head which must depart from us the following 
Monday morning!  
Shankara and other great Acharyas have all been tirelessly 
repeating that, right action, undertaken with a sense of 
devotion and dedication, creates in the bosom of the 
student a sense of complete detachment, as though he 
himself is a disinterested observer of all that is happening 
within and without him. When thus an individual 
detaches himself and observes his own activities as part 
and parcel of the world of activities around, he gains in 
himself an indescribable poise which is essential for the 
practice of meditation.  
Merely because an individual is keeping quiet, we cannot 
ever conclude that he is inac tive. Physical inactivity is no 
criterion to call one an idler. On the other hand, it is a fact 
well-known to all of us, that, when we are intensely 
thinking --- whenever we are in a state of creative thinking 
--- we are invariably quiet and inactive, physically. 
Therefore, in the physical inactivity of one, which is 
labelled as idleness by the hectic foot-path-walkers in life, 
we can detect intense activity in his deep "within." A 
Buddha under the fig-tree, an artist at his easel, a musician 
at his instrument, a writer at his desk --- all of them 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
289 
 
punctuate their activities with 'still moments of intense 
inactivity'-called unactivity-and they bend forward to 
pour out their artistic and literary creations. All these 
physical moments of cessation are not mere inactivity but  
they are the necessary quietude and silence when the 
mind and intellect function with the highest velocity. 
Thus, he who has a capacity to introspect, can easily detect 
perfect action in complete inaction.  
As I am writing these words a certain part in me can stand 
apart and visualise how my fi ngers, constituted of mere 
minerals, can hold the pen at the right slant and carry it 
along the paper so that the words may be spelt properly 
thereon. So, in all activities, this capacity to visualise 
discriminatingly our own activity --- this capacity to 
observe ourselves functioning in a given field with or 
without the other members of the community --- is not 
very rare and those who can do it can realise how, inspite 
of all our activities, the obse rver in us which OBSERVES 
the activities is most INACTIVE.  
The train runs, but not the steam. The fan moves, but not 
the electricity. The fuel burns, but not the fire. The body, 
mind and intellect function and act, but not the Self, the 
Life in them!  
Such an individual who can thus stand constantly apart 
from himself and observe "the  activity in inactivity" and 
"complete inactivity even in the highest activity... called 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
290 
 
UNACTIVITY"... is termed he re, we must carefully note, 
not a man of realisation ( Jnani), but an intelligent, full-
grown human creature ( Buddhiman). "He is the intelligent 
one among men," and he is cert ainly one who is very near 
to the Self (Atma Yuktah).  
In short, desireless activi ties, when un dertaken and 
performed in a spirit of dedication, purify us, and the 
intellect thereby gains a new keenness. Out of such a 
purified head, a new faculty, as it were, arises. The 
capacity to observe oneself as an  actor on the stage of life, 
is a capacity divine and noble, inasmuch as it immediately 
redeems us from our selfish preoccupations with life's 
ever-changing incidents and accidents.  
REALISATION OF 'INACTION IN ACTION' AND 
'ACTION IN INACTION' IS EXTOLLED AS FOLLOWS:  
  
19. Whose undertakings are all devo id of desires and purposes, 
and whose actions have been burnt by the Fire-of-Knowledge, 
him the "wise" call a Sage.  
He is called a Saint, a man-of-Perfection, "whose 
undertakings are all devoid of plan and desire-for-result." 
Planning is a shackle upon th e freedom of one's activities. 
In all planning, we are forcin g the circumstances into a 
desired mould, a wished-for pattern. In thus driving the 
situations to mould themselves into a planned pattern, we 
are exhausting ourselves and vainly fighting against 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
291 
 
terrible odds. This method of activity drains away all 
inspiration and joy from the worker.  
We have already discussed how the desire-for-results 
during any activity dissipates our energies. The fruits-of-
an-action can only mature in a future period of time and 
therefore, to court the results is to escape from the present 
and live in the unborn periods of  time. It is a law that the 
effects depend entirely upon the causes, and so to be 
sincere and complete in our activities is the greatest 
guarantee for all successful achievements.  
One who is a perfect Sage, sa ys Krishna, is one who will 
undertake to act "WITHOUT PLANNING" and 
"WITHOUT ANY DESIRE FOR FRUI T S . "  I n  t h i s  c o n t e x t ,  
these two qualifications of  a perfect act are to be 
understood with kindness and sympathy. A literal 
meaning of these two terms shou ld not be used here, as in 
that case the statement would become absurd.  
The instruction to act "WITHOUT PLANNING AND 
DESIRE" does not mean that a man-of-Equilibrium, in his 
inspired activity, should not make use of his better 
intelligence and plan his activiti es to gain a desired result. 
It only means that, WHILE HE IS AT WORK, he should 
not allow his abilities and capacities to run to waste, with 
his mental preoccupations and sentimental fears 
regarding the results-of-his-work. Vedanta does not in any 
way ignore man's intellect. The way of life as advised in 
the Geeta provides only a more  efficient means to act and 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
292 
 
achieve, to live and to enjoy,  cultivating and applying our 
own potentialities more intelligently.  
An individual, who has thus come to live intelligently and 
act diligently, becomes fully wedded to the piece of work 
in hand and gets so entirely drunk with the joy of his own 
inspiration, that the action cannot leave upon him even a 
trace of its reaction. Our mind and intellect will venture 
forth to worry over the unknown possibilities and 
dangers, unless they can find a more secure hold upon 
something nobler and diviner. A perfect Sage is one 
whose mind is ever hitched on to the cognition of the 
Divine, so that, even when he functions in the world 
outside, he is revelling in his own Consciousness within.  
By thus painting the psychology of a Sage-at-work, Lord 
Krishna is indicating with what mental attitude and 
intellectual composure, Arjuna, a seeker, should enter his 
fields of activity. These instructions, given by Vyasa 
through the mouth of Krishna, are meant for all 
generations of seekers and, therefore, words addressed to 
Arjuna are also words addressed to you and to me.  
When my son wants to become a doctor I would certainly 
explain to him the story of the struggle of some known 
doctors, so that my son ma y understand how best he 
himself can become a true do ctor. So too here, by the 
description of a perfect Sage-at-work, Arjuna is being 
initiated into the "Path of Self-development," which he is 
to follow faithfully, if he is to reach the goal of life.  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
293 
 
DEVOID OF ALL DESIRE-PROMPTED ACTIONS, AND 
ATTACHMENTS TO THEIR RESULTS, AND 
THEREFORE, HAVING NO SELFISH END IN VIEW, 
WHEN A SAGE PERFORMS KINDLY ACTS IN THE 
COMMUNITY, HE REALLY DOES NO ACTION; HIS 
ACTION IS EQUIVALENT TO "INACTION," SINCE  
ALL HIS ACTIONS ARE CONSUMED IN THE FIRE OF 
KNOWLEDGE. TO TEACH THIS "UNACTIVITY," THE 
LORD SAYS:  
  
20. Having abandoned attachment to the fruits-of-action, ever-
content, depending on nothing, he does not do anything, though 
engaged in actions.  
We are not asked here to renounce the fruits-of-actions as 
such nor to ignore them, but we are only warned to 
renounce our MENTAL SLAVERY and INTELLECTUAL 
CLINGING to the "expected-fruits." Only when we get 
preoccupied with  
the expected fruits of our actions do we come to exhaust 
ourselves, and thus become in efficient in our activities. 
Forsaking ( tyaktwa) our clinging ( Sanga) to the fruits-of-
action ( Karma-phala), we are advised to strive for and to 
achieve the welfare of the society.  
A true painter never willingly sells his masterpiece! To 
him, that piece of canvas upon which he has lavished long 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
294 
 
periods of effort, is now by it self a complete reward, even 
if he be starving!! As compare d to the satisfaction and joy 
that it gives to the painter, he feels that even all the wealth 
in the world would but be too little a payment for it. If a 
mere finite piece of art could thus give to an ignorant man 
of agitations and desires, such an invaluable joy, how 
much more intense must be th e diviner joys of a perfect 
saint working in the world of names and forms? Indeed, 
the Self-realised Ones, after thei r experience of the Infinite 
Reality as their own Self, become perfectly independent of 
everything else.  
Again, the anxiety for the fruits-of-action, the sense of 
discontentment and the feelin g of dependency upon the 
things and beings of the world --- all belong to the 
misconceived notion of the ego-centre. The ego in us is the 
sufferer of all the above-mentioned incapacities and 
inabilities. When the seeker-after-Truth rediscovers his 
ego to be the Infinite Truth, the limited ego ends its career 
of sorrow, and naturally, the agony and the incapacities of 
the imperfect ego also end. Th e reflection of the sun in a 
cup of water can be broken up when the water in the cup 
is shaken. But when the water is poured out, the reflection 
also ends, and no more can the sun in the sky be shaken 
by any known method.  
Such an individual, who has rediscovered the Self, 
"THOUGH SEEMINGLY ENGAGED IN ACTIVITY," does 
not do anything.  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
295 
 
The body, mind, and intellect act in the world-of-objects, 
but not the All-pervading Self --- the Life --- in us. Without 
'Life' the body cannot fun ction; but when the body 
functions, 'Life' as such cannot be said to function. 
Therefore, one who is establis hed in the Self, though he 
engaged himself in action, cannot be said to do any action. 
The train may move but it woul d be incorrect to say that 
the steam is moving.  
It is generally a doubt in the students that, even if all the 
reactions of the past actions have ended at the time of Self-
re-discovery, when such a prophetic Master undertakes 
activity in the world, he would,  perhaps, be initiating new 
actions of sins and merits for the enjoyment of which he 
may again have to take up births. This false idea has been 
completely eradicated in this stanza. After the God-
experience, when the saint functions in the world outside, 
"THOUGH ENGAGED IN ACTION HE DOES NOT DO 
ANYTHING."  
EVERY ACTION HAS A REACTION. NATURALLY, 
EVEN THE BODILY ACTIONS OF A SAINT SHOULD 
HAVE SOME REACTION. THIS IS THE ORDINARY 
ARGUMENT. TO NEGATE THIS ASSUMPTION THE  
LORD SAYS:  
21. Without hope, with the mind and Self controlled, having 
abandoned all possessions, doing mere bodily action, he incurs 
no sin.  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
296 
 
Mere bodily activity is not action that will merit a reaction. 
It has already been seen that the reactions of actions take 
place in the mental and in the intellectual zones. An action 
can leave a mark on our subtle-body only when we act 
with an ego-centric consciou sness that we are the actors, 
and these marks can be effect ive only when our actions 
are motivated by powerful and strong ego-centric 
"desires."  
Ego is created only when the Self, in its assumed delusion, 
identifies itself with the body, mind, and intellect and 
their respective fields of objects. This ego draws its 
sustenance from the "hopes of  the future," and also from 
the "satisfaction of the present" possessions.  
Therefore, the stanza declares that an individual, (a) when 
he has completely renounced hope, (b) when he has 
brought his body and mind under perfect control, and (c) 
when he has relinquished all possessions, can no longer 
sustain the illusory concept of  the ego in him. When the 
ego has ended, the actions performed by that individual's 
body become incapable of leaving any permanent mark 
upon his mental constitution, or on his intellectual 
character.  
I n  s l e e p  i f  I  b e c o m e  n a k e d  I  a m  n o t  c h a r g e d  o f  a n y  
indecent behaviour; if, in my sleep, my body kicks my 
own son, I am not accused of cruelty to my child. For, in 
both the above cases we know that "for the actions of my 
body I am not responsible, sinc e I was absent in that body 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
297 
 
during those activities." This clearly shows that the ego-
centric identity with the body is the actor and the sufferer, 
and where the ego is not, th ere the mere bodily actions 
cannot bring about any consequences.  
A Self-realised Saint's activities do not touch him at all 
since he is not the actor; the actions only flow through 
him. Such a truly Great One becomes not a doer of actions, 
but serves as a glorious instrument for the Lord's Will to 
express itself.  
If the music coming from a violin is not good, the 
audience does not attack the violin, although the violinist 
cannot be very safe! The violin, of its own accord, does not 
make music but it allows musi c to emanate from it at the 
touch of the flying bow and the tickling fingers of the 
performer. Its duties end when its supple chords have 
bent under the touch of the musician's dancing fingers. An 
ego-less man-of-Perfection is the "wonder instrument" 
through which the Divine orchestra plays, singing the 
song of the Lord's own Will, faithfully. Any activity 
undertaken by a Perfect Mast er does not and cannot bring 
about any consequences, good orevil, upon him; he is only 
a "Divine-instrument."  
THOUGH A SELF-REALISED MAN RENOUNCES ALL 
ACTIONS, HE HAS, OF NECESSITY, TO BARELY 
MAINTAIN HIS BODY; SUCH A MAN STEADY ON  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
298 
 
THE 'PATH-OF-KNOWLEDGE' IS EVER LIBERATED. 
TO TEACH THIS THE LORD SAYS:  
  
22. Content with what comes to him without effort, free from the 
pairs-of-opposites and envy, even-minded in success and failure, 
though acting he is not bound.  
Such an individual, who has gone beyond his own ego, 
can thereafter commence no desire-prompted activity 
with any definite fruit-motive . Naturally he will feel quite 
contented and happy in what ever gain spontaneously 
rises out of his actions. The state-of-egolessness indicates a 
condition of perfect conquest over the mind and intellect. 
Naturally therefore, the pairs-of-opposites --- heat and 
cold, success and failure, good and bad, joy and sorrow, 
etc. --- cannot affect him,  they being always the 
interpretations of the world-of-objects by the mind.  
Where the mind has ended, the intellect too can no more 
bring its own affections and prejudices, or its spirit of 
competitions and jealousies. We generally get agitated due 
to the pulls of success and failure. On the rising tide of 
success our ego dances in a vain joy, while in the hollows 
of failures it feels miserable and crushed. But when the 
ego is completely divinised, the individual will, thereafter, 
automatically remain equanimous in both success and 
failure. Such an individual who has thus conquered his 
ego-centric misconceptions about himself, "THOUGH 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
299 
 
ACTING, IS NOT FETTERED" by the natural 
consequences of the actions performed (Karma-phala).  
When such a Perfect-Master-of-Realisation lives amidst us 
he is generally seen to act in no way different from an 
ordinary sensible man, and yet,  all the same, his activities 
show an extra dynamic capacity to carve out a more 
complete and enduring success. According to the Lord's 
words, the activities of a man-of-Knowledge do not, in 
any sense of the term, affect him. Naturally, it becomes a 
little difficult for an ordinary man to know readily how 
this is accomplished by the sage.  
TO EXPLAIN THE DIVINE  MOTIVE AND ATTITUDE 
WITH WHICH MEN-OF-PERFECTION ACT IN THE 
WORLD, THE FOLLOWIN G NINE STANZAS ARE 
DECLARED BY THE LORD:  
23. Of one who is devoid of atta chment, who is liberated, whose 
mind is established in knowledge , who acts for the sake of 
sacrifice, all his actions are dissolved.  
A Man-of-Wisdom has been fully comprehended in the 
first line of this stanza. The qu alifications are beautifully 
enumerated serially and th ey themselves explain the 
"Path-to-Perfection." Econom y of words is the very 
essence of the style in all Scriptural books. Even so, they 
are particularly careful to use the most suggestive terms 
for their purpose and take an artistic joy in ordering the 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
300 
 
very sequence of the words used; here is a brilliant 
example of it.  
DEVOID OF ATTACHMENT (Gatasangah) --- The divinity 
attained by the Rishis is not a new status strangely 
acquired by them from some unknown and secret 
quarters. It is only a rediscovery of the Perfection that is 
already in each one. We are self-exiled from ourselves due 
to our attachments with the fi nite world-of-objects. Thus a 
"wise" man is he, from whom all his attachments with the 
finite things of the world have dropped away.  
LIBERATED ( Muktah) --- The majority of seekers have 
only a vague idea of what this "liberation" means. The 
bondages are created upon our personality and life by 
none other than ourselves. These bondages, infinite in 
their number, are produced by the subtle chords of our 
own attachments with things. The deluded ego feels 
fulfilled only through the world-of-objects. Thus, as a 
body, it gets attached to the world of its sense-objects; as a 
mind it lives enslaved to the world of emotions; and as an 
intellect, it gets bound with its own ideas.  
WITH MIND CENTRED IN KNOWLEDGE ( Jnana-
avasthita-chetasah) --- The above phenomenon of perfect 
detachment, which produces a sense of complete 
liberation, can be accomplished only when the mind of the 
seeker gets centred in right discriminative knowledge and 
develops for itself a capaci ty to distinguish between the 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
301 
 
permanent and the imperman ent, the fleeting and the 
lasting.  
A Perfect Sage, who has thus cut himself free from all 
attachments, with his mind well-balanced under the light 
of his own "Wisdom," becomes completely liberated from 
the chains of all moral debilit ies, ethical imperfections, 
and sensuous appetites. Such  a Sage too performs work 
for the rest of his life in his perfected manifestations. 
Krishna says that all such activities undertaken and 
performed by him are ever done  in a spirit of 'dedicated 
activity' (Yajna). When a Sage thus functions in a spirit of 
Yajna, that action itself does not and cannot produce any 
reaction, or forging of thicker bondages with newly-
formed vasanas.  
The term ' Yajna,' borrowed from our scriptures, is 
employed here by Krishna to yield a more elaborate sense 
implying a wider and a more universal application. In the 
Geeta, the Vedic Yajna has become "a self-dedicated 
activity performed in a spirit of service to the many." All 
actions, performed without ego, and not motivated by 
one's ego-centric desires, fall under the category of Yajna.  
All through the NEXT SIX STANZAS we get an 
enumeration of something like twelve different Yajnas 
which can be practised by everybody, on all occasions, in 
every field, under all conditions.  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
302 
 
When a sage of the description given in the stanza, 
performs actions in a spirit of Yajna, they dissolve away 
without leaving any impression upon his mind, just as the 
rainbow that disappears wh en the thin shower falling 
against the sunlight ends.  
IF THIS BE SO, THE QUESTION ARISES --- " FOR WHAT 
REASON THEN DO ALL ACTIONS WHICH HE 
PERFORMS ENTIRELY DISSOLVE, WITHOUT 
PRODUCING THEIR NATURAL RESULTS?" LISTEN 
WHY IT IS SO:  
24. BRAHMAN is the oblation; BRAHMAN is the clarified 
butter, etc. , constituting the offerings; by BRAHMAN is the 
oblation poured into the fire of BRAHMAN; BRAHMAN 
verily shall be reached by h im who always sees BRAHMAN in 
all actions.  
This is a famous stanza which is chanted throughout India 
as a prayer at the table before the Hindus eat their meals, 
although, today, ninety per cent of those who chant this 
stanza before their meals do not understand or care to 
follow its meaning. All the same it contains infinite 
suggestions and almost summarises the entire philosophic 
content of Vedanta.  
The Infinite Reality, which is the changeless substratum 
behind and beneath the changing panorama of the world, 
is indicated by the Vedic term Brahman, and this is 
contrasted with that aspect of Truth which functions in 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
303 
 
and through the body as the Atman. But though the 
Eternal Truth has been thus indicated by two different 
terms, Vedanta roars that "The Atman is Brahman."  
The metaphor is borrowed from the very well-known 
divine ritualism of the Vedas, the Yajnas. In every Yajna 
there are four essential factors --- (1) the deity invoked to 
whom the oblations are offered,  (2) the fire in which the 
offerings are poured, (3) the material things that constitute 
the offerings and (4) the indivi dual who is performing the 
Yajna.  
Here the stanza explains th e mental attitude and the 
experience of the Perfect-Sage when he performs the 
Yajna. To him Truth alone exists and not the delusory 
plurality which his erstwhile ignorance had conjured up 
for him in his mind. Therefore, to him, all Yajnas arise 
from Brahman; (III-14, 15) in which Brahman, the Truth, is 
the performer; offering Brahman, the material; to the 
sacred fire, which is also nothing other than Brahman; 
invoking but Brahman. When one wave jumps over 
another and breaks itself upto embrace and become one 
with its comrade, we, who know that "all waves are 
nothing but the ocean," can certainly understand that in 
this act of union between  two waves nothing has 
happened except that the ocea n rising over the ocean, 
broke itself to become one with the ocean!!  
If an individual can thus see the substratum, or the 
essential nature, in and through, all names and forms, 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
304 
 
actions and behaviours, to him, irrespective of all 
conditions and circumstances,  all beings and things are 
but a remembrance of the Infinite  Blissful Truth. If actions 
are performed by a Saint, in voking no deity other than 
Brahman, "ALL HIS ACTIONS DISSOLVE AWAY" 
because he is invoking but the One Truth through all his 
actions.  
The significance of the stanza as "a prayer to be said 
before food" is amply self-evi dent. To live we must eat. 
Food is necessary for existenc e. Whatever be the type of 
food, when one is hungry on e will enjoy one's meals. The 
suggestion is that even at this moment of natural 
enjoyment, we are not to forget the great Truth that it is 
Brahman eating Brahman, and that during our meals we are 
offering to Brahman, the food that is Brahman, invoking 
nothing but the grace of Brahman. To keep this idea 
constantly in the mind is to get perfectly detached from 
the enjoyment and raise ourselves to a greater and endless 
beatitude which is the reward of Super-manhood.  
AFTER REPRESENTING THE VERY SPIRIT IN ALL 
"YAJNAS," THE LORD IS TRYING TO SHOW ARJUNA 
HOW ALL THROUGH LIFE, ALL OUR ACTIONS CAN 
BE CONVERTED TO BECOME A " YAJNA." RIGHT 
KNOWLEDGE (" BHAVANA") MAKES EVERY ACT A 
"YAJNA." LISTEN:  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
305 
 
25. Some YOGIS perform sacrifice to DEVAS alone (DEVA-
YAJNA) ; while others offer "sacrifice" as sacrifice by the Self, 
in the Fire of BRAHMAN (BRAHMA-YAJNA) .  
In the following few stanzas, Lord Krishna is explaining 
the mental attitude of a Saint-at-Work. One doubt is 
generally raised by every intelligent student at all times. 
The spiritual experience, no doubt, can be had when the 
seeker in meditation transcends even his intellect. But 
then, this transcendental experience is bound to remain 
only for a limited time. The "Realised-Saint" is found 
working in the world, sometime s, in an elaborate fashion, 
like a Buddha or a Christ; in  some cases he works in a 
limited fashion, like a Ramana  Maharshi, and at certain 
moments he may not undertake any activity at all, but 
merely continue living among the world-of-objects. Now 
the doubt is: "what would be the mental attitude of such a 
Perfect-Master when he comes in contact with the world 
and functions in it?"  
A Yogi is one who is always trying, through all the means 
that are in him, to raise hims elf from his state of physical, 
mental and intellectual imperf ections to a more perfect 
state of existence. In this sense of the term it would be 
unjust to read into the stanza merely the obvious 
meaning.  
The word " Deva" comes from a root, meaning 
'illumination.' Subjectively viewed, the greatest " Devas" 
are the five sense organs: eyes illumining forms and 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
306 
 
colours, ears illumining so unds, the nose illumining 
smells, and the tongue and the skin illumining tastes and 
touches. Seekers, and Perfected-Masters ( Yogis) too, when 
they move in the world, no doubt perceive sense-objects 
through sense stimuli. But in their understanding and 
experience, perception is but "a world of sense-objects 
continuously offering themse lves into the fires of his 
perception in order to invoke the Devas (Sense-
perceptions)." Such seekers and masters walk out into life, 
and when they come across th e sense world, they only 
recognise and experience that the world-of-objects is 
paying a devoted tribute to the powers of sense-
perceptions!  
When this mental attitude is entertained constantly by a 
seeker he comes to feel co mpletely detached from the 
sense experiences and, irrespective of the quality of 
experience, he is able to maintain a constant sense of 
inward equanimity.  
As contrasted with this method ( Deva-Yajna) there are 
others who perform Brahma-Yajna, says Krishna, wherein 
they come to "OFFER THE SELF AS A SACRIFICE BY 
THE SELF IN THE FIRE OF THE SELF." This statement 
becomes perfectly clear when subjectively analysed and 
understood. As long as we exist in the body manifestation, 
we have to come across the world of sense-objects. The 
outer-world can yield to us its joy or sorrow not by itself 
but only as a result of our healthy or unhealthy attitude 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
307 
 
towards it. The objects in them selves are impotent to give 
us either joy or sorrow.  
The Perfect Masters understand that the sense-organs are 
only INSTRUMENTS-of-percept ion and that they can 
work only when in contac t with the Supreme, the Atman. 
In this true understanding all Masters live, allowing the 
sense-organs to sacrifice them selves in the Knowledge-of-
Brahman. Seekers also are, by this statement, advised as to 
how they too can gain a certain amount of freedom from 
their senses by dedicating their sense-life in the service of 
the world. When an individual's sense-organs of 
perception and action are to function and act --- not for his 
own ego-centric, selfish satisfactions but for the sake of 
serving the society or the worl d --- then, even if such an 
individual lives in the worl d-of-objects he will not be 
enslaved by his attachments to his possessions.  
AFTER THUS ENUMERATING THE " DEVA-YAJNA" 
AND THE " BRAHMA-YAJNA," LORD KRISHNA 
EXPOUNDS TWO MORE METHODS IN THE 
FOLLOWING:  
26. Some again offer hearing and other senses as sacrifice in the 
fires-of-restraint; others offer sound and other objects of sense as 
sacrifice in the fires-of-the-senses.  
SOME OTHER GREAT MASTERS OFFER HEARING 
AND OTHER SENSES IN TH E FIRES-OF-RESTRAINT --- 
In all these Yajnas described, the metaphor is taken from 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
308 
 
the most familiar ritualism known at the time to Arjuna. 
Oblations were offered, in Vedic ritualism, into the sacred-
fire in order to invoke the bl essings of the deity. In these 
examples, we are shown how when some materials are 
offered into a sacred-fire, not only the oblations get burnt 
up and consumed by the fire, but also, as a result, a great 
blessing accrues. Here, it is said that some Masters live on 
in life constantly offering thei r senses into the fire-of-self-
control, so that the senses, of their own accord get burnt 
up, contributing a greater freedom and joy in the inner life 
of the man. It is also a fact, very well experienced by all of 
us, that the more we try to satisfy the sense-organs the 
more riotous they become and loot away our inner joy. By 
self-control alone can the sens e-organs be fully controlled 
and mastered. This is yet another method shown to the 
seekers by which they can co me to experience and live a 
more intense life of deeper meditation.  
If in this method the "Path-o f-Sense-control" is indicated, 
in the second line the "Path- of-Mind-control" is suggested. 
The mind is sustained and fed by the stimuli that reach it 
from the outer world. The sense-objects perceived by the 
organs create and maintain the mind. The mind can never 
function in a field which cannot be interpreted in terms of 
the five types of sense-object s. Therefore, to make the 
mind non-receptive to the perceptions of the Indriyas is a 
method by which one can gain a better poise in life for 
purposes of meditation. Such an individual who has 
controlled the mind completely and withdrawn it totally 
from the sense-centres is in dicated here when the Lord 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
309 
 
says: "OTHERS OFFER SOUND AND OTHER OBJECTS 
IN THE FIRES OF THE SENSES."  
If the former method is a technique of controlling the 
stimuli at the very gateway of  the senses, the latter is a 
different technique of controlling the same from the inner, 
and therefore more subtle, level of perception, called the 
mind.  
AFTER THUS EXPLAINING THESE FOUR METHODS, 
YET ANOTHER TECHNIQUE HAS BEEN 
PROPOUNDED BY THE LORD IN THE FOLLOWING 
STANZA:  
27. Others again sacrifice all the functions of the senses and the 
functions of the breath (vital  energy) in the fire of the YOGA of 
self-restraint, kindled by knowledge.  
ALL THE ACTIVITIES OF THE SENSE-ORGANS 
(JNANA-INDRIYAS), AND THE ORGANS OF ACTION 
(PRANA-INDIRYAS) ARE OFFERED INTO THE 
KNOWLEDGE KINDLED-FIRE OF RIGHT 
UNDERSTANDING --- Control of the ego by the better 
understanding of the Divine Re ality is called here as the 
"Yoga-of-Self-restraint' (ATMA-SAMYAMA-YOGA).  
The "Path-of-Discrimination" ( Vichara) lies through a 
constant attempt at distinguishing between the limited lot 
of the ego and the divine dest inies of the Spirit. Having 
discriminated thus, to live more  and more as the Self, and 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
310 
 
not as the ego, is to "RESTRAIN THE SELF BY THE SELF 
(Atma-Samyama)." By this process, it is evident how the 
mad ramblings of the organs of perceptions and actions 
can be completely restrained and entirely conquered.  
EXHAUSTING THE ABOVE-MENTIONED FIVE 
DIFFERENT TECHNIQUES, AS THOUGH TO BRING TO 
THE UNDERSTANDING OF ARJUNA, THAT A 
HUNDRED OTHER METHODS CAN BE INDICATED, 
KRISHNA ENUMERATES IN HASTE FIVE MORE 
DIFFERENT METHODS IN THE FOLLOWING STANZA:  
28. Others again offer wealth, austerity and YOGA as sacrifice, 
while the ascetics of self-restraint and rigid vows offer study of 
scriptures and knowledge as sacrifice.  
OFFERING OF WEALTH ( Dravya-Yajna) --- Sacrifice of 
wealth is to be understood in its largest connotation. 
Charity and distribution of hone stly acquired wealth, in a 
sincere spirit of devotion to and in the service of the 
community, or of the individual who is the recipient of the 
benevolence, is called Dravya-Yajna. This includes more 
than a mere offering of money or food.  
The term Dravya includes everything that we possess, not 
only in the world outside but also in our worlds of 
emotions and ideas. To purs ue thus a life of charity, 
serving the world as best as we can, with all that we 
possess physically, mentally and intellectually is the noble 
sacrifice called "Wealth sacrifice."  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
311 
 
In order to perform this it is  not at all necessary that the 
devotee should be materially rich. Even if we are poor and 
physically DEBILITATED, from our bed of pain and 
penury, we can still be charitable, because our inner 
treasurers of love, kindness, sympathy and affection, do 
not at all depend either upon our material circumstances 
nor on our physical condition. Sometimes, a word of 
sincere sympathy, a look of love, a smile of true affection, 
or a word registering true friendship, can give to the 
receiver more than a heartless cheque, even if it be for a 
very fat sum.  
Tapo-yajna --- Some live, offering un to their Lord, a life of 
austerity. There is no religion in the world which does not 
prescribe, by some method or the other, periods of austere 
living. These austerities (Vratas) are invariably undertaken 
in the name of the Lord. It is very well-known that the 
Lord of Compassion, who f eeds and sustains even the 
lowliest of the low, can gain  no special joy because of a 
devotee's self-denial. But it is generally done in a spirit of 
dedication, so that the seek er might achieve some self-
control. This activity, in so me extreme cases very painful 
indeed, is undertaken in order that the devotee may learn 
to control himself in his sense-life.  
Yoga-yajna --- An earnest attempt of the lesser in us to 
grow into a better standard of  diviner living, is called 
Yoga. In this attempt, devoted worship of the Lord-of-the-
heart, called Upasana, is a primary method. This worship 
and love, offered to the Lord-of-the-heart, when 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
312 
 
performed without any desire or motive, is also called 
Yoga, since it directly hastens the seeker's self-
development.  
Swadhyaya-yajna --- The daily deep study of the scriptures 
is called Swadhyaya. Without a complete study of the 
scriptures we will not be in a po sition to know the logic of 
what we are doing in the name  of spiritual practice, and 
without this knowledge our practices cannot gain the edge 
and the depth that are essential for sure progress. Thus, in 
all religions, the daily study of the scriptures is insisted 
upon, as an essential training  during the seeker's early 
days. Even after Self-realisat ion, we find that the Sages 
spend all their spare-time reading and contemplating 
upon the inexhaustible wealth of details and suggestions 
in the scriptures.  
In its subjective implications, Swadhyaya means "self-study 
including the art of introspection pursued for 
understanding our own inner weaknesses." If, in the case 
of a seeker, it is a technique of estimating his own spiritual 
progress, in the case of a Seer , it will be for revelling in his 
own Self.  
Jnana-yajna --- The Sacrifice-of-Kno wledge: this word has 
very often been used in the Geeta and it constitutes one of 
the many original terms coined out by Vyasa to beautify 
the Lord's declarations. The "Sacrifice-of-Knowledge" is 
the term given to that activity in man by which he 
renounces all his ignorance into the fire-of-knowledge 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
313 
 
kindled BY him, IN him. This is constituted of two 
aspects; negation of the false, and assertion of the Real 
Nature of the Self. These two activities are effectively 
undertaken during the seeker's meditation.  
All these five methods of Self-development --- " sacrifice-
of-wealth," "austerity," "Yoga," "study" and "knowledge" --- 
can be practised with profit only by those who are men of 
"rigid determination" and who can find in themselves an 
inexhaustible enthusiasm to apply themselves consistently 
to reach this great goal. It is not sufficient that we know 
these paths, or that we decide  to gain these developments. 
Progress in spirituality can come only to one who is 
"sincere and consistent in his practices" (Yatayah).  
IN THE FOLLOWING VERSE KRISHNA EXPLAINS 
PRANAYAMA AS YET ANOTHER METHOD, THE 
ELEVENTH IN THE SERIES:  
29. Others offer as sacrifice the out-going breath in the in-
coming, and the in-coming in the out-going, restraining the 
courses of the out-going and in-coming breaths, solely absorbed 
in the restraint of breath.  
In this verse we have a description of the technique of 
'breath-control' regularly practised by some seekers, in 
order to keep themselves unde r perfect self-control, when 
they move amidst the sense-objects in the work-a-day 
world.  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
314 
 
As a sacrifice some offer "THE OUT-GOING BREATH 
INTO THE IN-COMING BREA TH AND OTHERS OFFER 
THE IN-COMING INTO THE OUT-GOING." The latter is, 
in the technique of Pranayama, called the Puraka, meaning 
the 'process of filing in'; while, the former is the 'process of 
blowing out,' technically called the Rechaka. These two 
processes are alternated with  an interval, wherein the 
'breath is held for sometime,' within and without, which is 
called the Kumbhaka. This process of Puraka-Kumbhaka-
Rechaka-Kumbhaka, when practised in a prescribed ratio, 
becomes the technique of breath-control ( Pranayama). This 
technique is again explained here as a Yajna by which the 
practitioner, in the long run, learns to offer all the 
subsidiary Pranas into the main Prana.  
Prana is not the breath; this is a general misunderstanding. 
Through breath-control we come to gain a perfect mastery 
over the activities of the Pranas in us. When very closely 
observed, we find that the term Prana used in the Hindu 
Scriptures indicates the various "manifested activities of 
life in a living body." They generally enumerate five 
different kinds of Pranas, which, when understood 
correctly, are found to be nothing but the five different 
physiological-functions in every living body.  
They are: (1) the function of perception, (2) the function of 
excretion, (3) the function of  digestion and assimilation, 
(4) the circulatory system, which distributes the food to all 
parts of the body, and lastly (5) the capacity in a living-
creature to improve himself in his mental outlook and 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
315 
 
intellectual life. These activities of life within, about which 
an ordinary man is quite un conscious, are brought under 
the perfect control of the individual through the process of 
Pranayama, so that a seeker can, by this path, come to gain 
a complete capacity to withdraw all his perceptions. This 
is indeed a great help to a meditator.  
IN THIS SERIES OF TECHNIQUES ENUMERATED BY 
KRISHNA, AS A LAST METHOD, WE HAVE IN THE 
FOLLOWING STANZA THE TWELFTH METHOD 
DETAILED:  
30. Others, with well-regulated diet, offer vital-airs in the Vital-
Air. All these are knowers of sacr ifice, whose sins are destroyed 
by sacrifice.  
There are some who, through systematic regulation of 
their diet, come to gain a complete mastery over 
themselves and their appetites and passions. Dieting is not 
at all a new technique in India. The ancient Rishis not only 
knew the vitamin-contents and the caloric-values of the 
various food materials, but al so prescribed very scientific 
combinations of the available vegetables and cereals to 
suit the temperament, function, and duties of persons 
belonging to different levels of  society. Not only this; they 
so well perfected their knowledge that they even showed 
how, through regulated dieting, a man's character and 
behaviour, and ultimately his very cultural quality, can be 
purified and raised.  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
316 
 
The verse adds that all these "KNOWERS OF Yajna," 
meaning all those who know "the art of living these 
techniques," when they practice  them in a spirit of self-
dedication and selfless enthusiasm, can fully come to 
profit by them. These meth ods and techniques do not 
promise that they will, of themselves, guide us or lead us 
to the Supreme. It is promised that all those who practise 
all, or a few, or even one of them for a sufficiently long 
period, can become "PURIFIED OF THEIR SINS."  
Sin, we have already discussed,  is but a wrong pattern of 
thought-channels that is etched in a mind by 
devolutionary thoughts, entert ained by a deluded ego in 
its extreme misunderstanding and its consequent 
attachment with the body and sense-objects. It is these 
sinful vasanas that make the ego act like an animal and 
force it to commit low and vicious criminalities. The 
above-mentioned practices not only wipe clean the 
existing wrong- vasanas but cut out in their place new-
channels-of-thoughts, more constructive and evolutionary 
in their very nature.  
Thus, it must be carefully noted that all practices, physical, 
mental, or intellectual, that are generally known as divine 
and religious, are, without exce ption, only techniques by 
which the mind-and-intellect equipment gets adjusted for 
greater and more effective self-application in meditation. 
Meditation is the "path" in which the ego learns to 
withdraw its false evaluations of itself in particular, and of 
life in general, and comes to the final experience of its own 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
317 
 
divine nature. We often find sincere seekers getting so 
extremely attached to their own "path" of practice that 
they constantly argue about it among themselves. 
Therefore, Arjuna has been instructed here that all "paths," 
however noble and great they may be, are all but means, 
and not an end in themselves.  
IN ALL THE ABOVE-ENUMERATED TWELVE 
DIFFERENT "YAJNA-TECHNIQUES," SELF-EFFORT IS A 
COMMON FACTOR, AND THEREFORE, THE LORD 
SAYS:  
31. The eaters of the nectar --- rem nant of the sacrifice --- go to 
the Eternal BRAHMAN. Even this world is not for the non-
performer of sacrifice; how then the other (world) , O best of the 
Kurus?  
EATING THE SACRED REMNANT OF THE Yajna --- In 
the ancient ritualism of fire-sacrifices, things that were 'left 
over' in the pot from which the offerings were made, were 
called the "sacred remains," and they were considered by 
the devotees as divinely potent-remnants from the Lord's 
own plates. This was generally eaten by the devotees with 
great reverence, and it was considered that, thereby their 
minds would get purified.  
In the metaphor used here, when we try to find its 
corresponding implication in the subjective world, we 
must understand "the remnant that is left over" to mean 
"the result of the above-mentioned twelve types of Yajnas." 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
318 
 
The result of any one of the above 'Yajnas' is, as we know, 
a greater amount of self-control and the consequent inner 
integration of the individual personality. Those who have 
gained this have prepared themselves for the greatest 
vocation in life called 'intense meditation.'  
Such an integrated man can gain a greater inner poise in 
his meditation through which he can easily come to 
experience the Infinite and the Eternal, indicated by the 
term Brahman. The second line of the verse contains a 
beautiful generalisation which clinches the main idea, that 
self-development and inner growth cannot be had without 
investing continuous and sincer e self-effort. Inaction can 
never bring about any profit even in this world, in any 
field whatsoever. Without self-dedicated and selfless 
activity, no great and enduring profit can be achieved in 
this world, and therefore, Krishna exclaims: "How could a 
seeker hope to achieve the Highest without any conscious 
effort at gaining it?"  
Two doubts can arise in the mi nds of ruthlessly intelligent 
students. It may be doubted:  "Can all these different 
'paths' lead us to one and the same goal, or do they lead to 
different goals?" It may also be doubted: "Are these not 
mere intellectual theories propounded by Krishna himself 
as an original contribution to Hindu thought?"  
THE FOLLOWING EXPLAINS THESE TWO DOUBTS:  
  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
319 
 
32. Thus innumerable sacrifices lie spread out before 
BRAHMAN --- (literally at the mouth or face of BRAHMAN ) 
--- Know them all as born of action, and thus knowing, you shall 
be liberated.  
In the world, no two different activities produce the same 
set of results. The twelve different Yajnas described so far, 
are all conspicuously different from one another, and so 
they must all be producing not an identical result but a 
series of different effects. In order to show that though the 
"paths" are different, all of them ultimately lead to the 
same goal, it is said here: "Various Yajnas lie open, leading 
to the gate of Brahman, the ETERNAL." Just as 'all roads 
lead to Rome,' all the above-mentioned techniques of 
Yajna also ultimately lead to one and the same goal.  
KNOW THEM ALL TO BE BORN OF ACTION --- This 
timely reminder of the Lord  has more than one direct 
suggestion: (a) these "paths" prescribed in the Vedas are all 
to be pursued through self-effort, and therefore, Arjuna is 
reminded of the inevitability of right action, if he wants to 
move ahead in his cultural self-development; and (b) it 
also suggests that all these "paths" are only the means and 
not the end. Action is born of "desires," and, therefore, as 
long as there is action there is no redemption from 
"desires." The "State-of-Desirelessness" is the "State-of-
Perfection," and therefore, in the context of our 
understanding, these pregnant  words of the verse ring a 
note of warning that we shou ld not misunderstand these 
Yajnas as the very goal of life.  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
320 
 
UNDERSTANDING THUS, YOU SHALL BE FREE --- 
Here the word "understanding" is not a mere intellectual 
apprehension but a complete spiritual comprehension, in 
a vivid subjective experience of Reality.  
Right-Knowledge was represented as a "Knowledge-
sacrifice" (IV-24). Then, several sacrifices have been 
mentioned. Knowledge is now being extolled, as 
compared with these latter kind s of sacrifices, which are 
all means of attaining the Purushartha --- the inner 
integration.  
33. Superior is "knowledge-sacrific e" to "Sacrifice-with-objects, 
" O Parantapa. All actions in their entirety, O Partha, 
culminate in Knowledge.  
Krishna compares the Dravya-Yajna --- the sacrifice of 
material oblations --- with Jnana-Yajna, and declares that, 
for cultural self-development, Jnana-Yajna is any day 
nobler and diviner than mere formalistic ritualism with 
material offerings (Dravya-Yajna).  
In the second line of the ve rse the Lord explains how and 
why He considers "the sacrifice of 'ignorance'in 
Knowledge" (Jnana-Yajna) as greater and nobler than "the 
sacrifice of food and other ma terials in the sacred fire" 
(Dravya-Yajna). Ritualistic Karmas produce results to enjoy 
which the individual ego has to take up new 
manifestations, wherein again, he has yet to undertake 
and perform more and more activities. Karma never ends 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
321 
 
Karma, and therefore, action cannot be a complete 
fulfilment in itself.  
On the other hand, Right-Knowledge ( Jnana) ends all 
Karmas, once and for all, inasmuch as the deluded-ego 
destroys itself in the light-of-Self-Knowledge. We have 
already seen that 'ignorance'causes 'desires,' and desires 
are the seeds from which a ll actions arise. When this 
'ignorance,' the primary source of all activities, ends at the 
dawn of 'Knowledge,' all actions naturally get fulfilled. 
Therefore, "ALL ACTION IN ITS ENTIRETY, O PARTHA, 
ATTAINS ITS CONSUMMATION IN KNOWLEDGE."  
IF THUS, BY 'KNOWLEDGE' ALONE WE CAN REALLY 
GAIN THE FULLEST SATISFACTION, THEN HOW ARE 
WE TO GAIN THIS 'KNOWLEDGE' BY WHICH ALL 
ACTIONS CAN AT ONCE BE BURNT UP AND 
EXHAUSTED?  
34. Know that by long prostratio n, by question, and service, the 
"wise" who have realised the Truth will instruct you in (that) 
'Knowledge. '  
The verse explains the qualit ies that are necessary in a 
teacher, who alone can instruct us on the "Path-of-
Knowledge" and guide us to the great consummation in 
all life. It also explains the mental attitude and the 
intellectual approach which a successful student must 
adopt, so that his contact with the Guru may be fruitful.  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
322 
 
PROSTRATING YOURSELF --- All that is meant here is 
that the student must have an intellectual attitude of 
surrender and meekness, respect and obedience, when he 
approaches the teacher who has to instruct him upon the 
secret-of-life. Regarding the world within and the 
methods of its control, ordinarily, the students are 
completely ignorant, and ther efore, they must approach 
the teacher with a readiness to understand, grasp and 
follow his instructions.  
Just as water flows always from a higher to a lower level, 
so too, 'knowledge' can flow only to a lower level. It is, 
therefore, necessary that the student must have a "spirit of 
prostration" in him so that he may be able to get himself 
surcharged with the 'Knowl edge' that flows from the 
teacher. Thus the prostration, as used here, essentially 
defines more, the required mental and intellectual attitude 
of the student, than his physical readiness to fall-flat on 
the ground at the feet of his Master.  
BY QUESTIONS --- By raising doubts to the teacher we 
are opening up the cistern of 'Knowledge' locked up in the 
Master's bosom. A perfect Guru immediately detects from 
the questions, the false line of thinking in the student, and 
while removing the very doubt, he imperceptibly orders 
and reorganises the right-way of thinking in the inner 
thought-life of the student. When this intellectual 
wrestling has been practised fo r a long time, the fragrance 
of perfection in the teacher, as  it were, gets transferred to 
the student's life!  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
323 
 
Therefore, it has been an immortal tradition among the 
Hindus to have open discussi ons between the teacher and 
the taught, called Satsanga. This privilege is not available 
in all religions of the world. In fact, Vedanta alone thus 
dares to proclaim a perfect freedom for the intellect. It 
never trades upon the blind faith of the seekers. In all 
other religions, faith is a great power and force, and 
therefore, many of the intell ectual imperfections in their 
Scriptures cannot be completely answered; and the priests 
therein must necessarily ch eck the full freedom of the 
seekers to question their sacred texts.  
BY SERVICE --- The offering of  flowers and sweetmeats is 
not what constitutes seva. These have been understood as 
the service of the teacher only as a by-product of 
institutionalism and Ashrama organisation. A true service 
of the teacher lies in the attempt of the student to attune 
himself to the principles of life advocated and advised to 
him by the Master. To live the life indicated by the Rishis 
is the greatest seva that an imperfect mortal can offer to the 
Man-of-Perfection.  
The two main qualifications essential for a fully useful 
teacher on the spiritual path are: (a) a perfect knowledge 
of scriptural literature and (b) a complete subjective 
experience of the Infinite Reality. These two factors are 
indicated here. Each, without the other, is totally useless 
in guiding a seeker. Mere know ledge of the Scriptures can 
make only a learned Pandita and not a Perfect-Master. A 
man of intimate experience of Truth will, in himself, 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
324 
 
become completely silent, because he will find it 
impossible to explain and e xpress his own transcendental 
experience to other seekers.  
BY THIS THE LORD MEA NS TO SAY THAT, THAT 
'KNOWLEDGE' ALONE, WHICH IS IMPARTED BY 
THOSE WHO HAVE REALISED THE TRUTH --- THAT 
'KNOWLEDGE' ALONE AND NO OTHER 
'KNOWLEDGE' --- CAN PROVE EFFECTIVE. THEN THE 
FOLLOWING STATEMENT HOLDS GOOD:  
35. Knowing that, you shall not, O Pandava, again get deluded 
like this; and by that, you shall se e all beings in your Self, and 
also in Me.  
After all these painful troubles, it may chance that we may 
get 'Knowledge,' but after on e's death one may again fall 
back to 'ignorance'and come to repeat the same process. 
Even in our own life-time there have been many things 
learnt and experienced which we do not now remember. 
Similarly, this 'Knowledge' also may be lost to us in which 
case it will be indeed a great loss.  
This doubt is fully cleared here by an assertive, confident 
declaration that after regaining this 'Knowledge,' "YOU 
SHALL NOT, O PANDAVA, AGAIN GET DELUDED 
LIKE THIS." This declaration, rather fanatical in style, has 
to be, for the time being, accepted by all seekers. All 
teachers unanimously declare this idea and since they 
have no particular reason to deceive their generation, it is 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
325 
 
but intelligent that we should accept the truth of this 
declaration in good faith --- t ill we come to confirm it in 
our own personal experience.  
No doubt, an immature child can never understand the 
physical thrills of the nupt ial chamber, and thereby it 
cannot be said that the n ewly-weds are always telling 
lies!! The little child has not matured enough even to feel 
sympathetically the thrills explained. Similarly, we, living 
in delusion, cannot UNDERS TAND the thrills of the 
transcendental, or EXPERIENCE its Eternal Nature --- 
however vividly the teachers may explain, until we also 
grow to the required inner maturity.  
By this rediscovery of the Se lf, Krishna promises that the 
Pandava Prince will thereafter be able to recognise the 
entire creation --- constituted of the world of objects, 
emotions, and ideas --- as nothing other than the Self, 
which is his own real Nature; which again is nothing other 
than 'Me', Lord Krishna, the Paramatman. Having for once 
realised the ocean, all the waves are recognised by the 
intelligent-eye as nothing but the ocean.  
In this stanza, thus, tests of having realised "that 
Knowledge" --- discussed in the previous stanzas, are 
given. It also indicates how long we must hold on to the 
apron of a true Guru. As long as we have not realised that 
the whole creation is nothing but our own Self, which is as 
divine and omnipotent as the Lord of Dwarka Himself, so 
long we cannot afford to leave our intimate relationship 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
326 
 
and complete dependence upon the Preceptor and Guide, 
the Guru.  
MOREOVER, SEE HOW EXCELLENT 'KNOWLEDGE' IS:  
36. Even if you are the most sinful  of all sinners, yet you shall 
verily cross all sins by the raft of 'Knowledge. '  
While Arjuna was promised such a glorious 
transcendental experience, too divine for him to believe, 
he felt a certain amount of la ck of confidence in himself, 
which was, perhaps, reflected, on his face. He had a 
feeling that he was not fit for such a great inner 
experience. Such a feeling ca n come to anyone of us, 
because there is none among the intelligent who is not 
painfully conscious of his own shortcomings.  
Vedanta is not a philosophy that heartlessly keeps the 
sinners out of its halls of wisd om. It does not believe that 
there is any lost soul who will ever wander among the 
heathens, and who can ONLY be redeemed IF he enters 
the portals of the Church of Vedanta!! Tolerant to a fault, 
Vedanta declares the Truth and no thing but the Truth. The 
All-pervading Divine manifests everywhere and therefore, 
there is no sinner who cann ot, through his endeavour, 
come to claim his own heritage of Absolute Perfection.  
The Geeta is a scripture of life written for man, and its 
universality is unmistakably s een in the statement here. It 
assures man that "EVEN IF HE BE THE MOST SINFUL 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
327 
 
AMONG THE SINFUL," he too can cross over his painful 
destinies of the present and reach the shores that lie 
beyond finitude and imperfecti ons. Such a clear charter of 
man's right to the Divine has never so far been written in 
any other existing scripture of the world!!  
To rediscover that, in reality, the ego is nothing other than 
the Self in us, and to live thereafter as the Self of all, is 
called true 'Wisdom' ( Jnana). Having thus awakened to 
our Real Nature, the dreamy cravings of the flesh can no 
more enchant us away from our pristine glory and make 
us run down the channels of sensuousness, to wreck 
ourselves on the stony bed of sin and sorrow. This is 
indicated by a beautiful metaphor: "BY THE RAFT OF 
'KNOWLEDGE' ALONE SHALL YOU GO ACROSS ALL 
SINS."  
IN WHAT MANNER DOES THIS WISDOM DESTROY 
SIN?... HERE IS AN EXAMPLE:  
37. As the blazing fire reduces fuel  to ashes, O Arjuna, so does 
the Fire-of-Knowledge reduce all actions to ashes.  
JUST AS FIRE REDUCES FUEL TO ASHES --- This 
example has been given by the Lord in His sheer fatherly 
love for Arjuna. These words, familiar in all Yajnashalas, 
when used apart from their word meaning, are capable of 
creating, in their association, brilliant suggestions of a 
serene atmosphere and a thrilled sense of divinity.  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
328 
 
Besides, the example is very striking. Whatever be the 
quality, shape, condition, colour, etc., of the fuel pieces, 
when all of them are taken to the fire-place and digested 
by the fire, they become one homogeneous mass of ash! In 
the samples of ash left in the hearth we cannot recognise 
the ash of a particular twig as different from that of 
another. Similarly, all Karmas, it is said, good, bad, or 
indifferent, get burnt up in the 'Fire of Knowledge' and 
will become something altogether different from what 
they were in their cause-and- effect condition. Solid fuel 
having girth, weight, smell, etc., becomes almost 
weightless, with no specific colour except a light-greyness, 
when it comes to the final state of ash.  
Actions leave reactions. The reactions mature at different 
periods of time depending upon the quality and intensity 
of the actions. From beginningless time, in our different 
manifestations, we have been, at every moment, acting in 
our ego-centric vanity and indi viduality. All those actions 
must have left their residual impressions and they have to 
be lived through.  
This entire Karma has been scientifically considered as 
falling under three classification s. They are called "not yet 
operative" ( Sanchita), "operative" ( Prarabdha), and "to be 
operative in future" ( Agami). When, in the Geeta, it is said 
that all Karmas are burnt down, the Lord means the entire 
Sanchita and Agami.  
 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
329 
 
WHEREFORE:  
38. Certainly, there is no purifier in this world like 'Knowledge. 
' He who is himself perfected in YOGA finds it in the Self in 
time.  
So glorious is the result of Self-realisation that Lord 
Krishna explodes in enthusiasm and cries: "VERILY 
THERE EXISTS NOTHING IN THIS WORLD MORE 
NOBLE AND SACRED THAN SELF-KNOWLEDGE." Just 
as to a drowning man there is nothing more precious than 
a life-belt, so too, to the deluded ego there cannot be a 
greater possession and a no bler endeavour than the 
acquisition of 'Knowledge' of its own Real Nature.  
The Knowledge of the Self can be attained in one's own 
bosom when one has gained in oneself a full "MASTERY 
IN Yoga" --- when one has sincerely and diligently 
practised the above-mentioned twelve Yajnas and gained a 
complete self-mastery throug h them. This mastery of the 
Self over the flesh is no t given by any teacher. The 
traditional story of a teacher spiritualising a student by his 
touch is a myth; it is impossible. Had it been so, in the 
presence of such a perfect Prophet like Krishna, Arjuna 
could have attained --- especially when the Lord felt such 
a great friendliness and love towards him --- in a wink, all 
the spirituality needed to become a God-man.  
Many devotees have, from time to time, wasted their 
chances and brought dishonou r to their noble teachers, 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
330 
 
because they expected their Gurus to impart their acquired 
Wisdom to them, their Chelas (disciples), for the physical 
services rendered or the intellectual support given. Many 
of the existing seekers are, today, thoughtlessly 
squandering away their nobl e opportunities by vainly 
waiting for this cheap and ready method of purchasing 
God-hood! Let them be warned that, in spite of such 
glorifications of some Gurus available in the market and 
sold at some Ashramas in this country, it has no scriptural 
support. Here, Krishna, in all love, plainly tells the truth to 
Arjuna that he has to purify himself ( Swayam) and then he 
himself will realise the Truth "in good time" (Kalena).  
No definite time schedule is promised for Perfection to 
manifest. It is only said that he who is practising sincerely 
and devotedly, all the twelve different subjective- Yajnas 
that are described earlier, will attain the necessary growth 
within, and will "IN GOOD TIME"  come to experience the 
Self, the Beatitude-of-Perfection, the State of God-hood.  
IN GOOD TIME ( Kalena) --- This does not mean either 
immediately, nor does it promise us the Supreme only 
after trillions of impossible years. The same idea has been 
more beautifully described in the following stanza by a 
more self-explanatory term "ere long" ( Achirena). It gives a 
direct suggestion of hope and guidance to all seekers of all 
times that they need not be come impatient and that, in 
fact, it would be far better for them constantly to apply 
themselves on the right path in the full confidence that 
they shall "ere long" reach their goal.  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
331 
 
 
THE SUREST MEANS OF ACQUIRING WISDOM IS 
DECLARED AS FOLLOWS:  
39. The man who is full of faith,  who is devoted to It, and who 
has subdued the senses, obtains (th is) 'Knowledge' ; and having 
obtained 'Knowledge, ' ere long he goes to the Supreme Peace.  
The qualities that are necessary for an individual to be 
assured of the Knowledge-Divine are being enumerated 
here as vividly as from the leaf of a Science text-book. 
Three great qualities have been indicated and to 
understand them is to un derstand why the so-called 
seekers, in spite of their claims to sincere self-application, 
do not actually reach anywhere near the ladder of 
development. Faith, devotion , and self-control are the 
three imperative necessities to be acquired ere we can 
hope to evolve to the diviner stature from our present 
mortal encumbrances. But these three words are more 
often misunderstood than rightly evaluated.  
FAITH ( Shraddha) --- Exploiters of religions have been 
making capital out of repeating this word as their safest 
excuse for all problems spiritual, to clear which devotees 
may approach these men who pose themselves as guides 
in religion. Invariably, we find  that the ordinary devotees 
are completely rendered, sometimes fanatical and often 
poorer, in their intellectual and mental growth, because of 
the unintelligent insistence of Shraddha translated as "blind 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
332 
 
faith and unquestioned acceptance of any declaration said 
to be divine."  
Shankara tolls the death-knell of this misunderstanding 
when he explains Shraddha as "that by which an individual 
readily understands the exact import of the scriptural text 
as well as the pregnant words of advice of the preceptor."  
DEVOTED TO IT ( Tatparah) --- Whatever be the 'path' of 
divine self-development that he  may be following, it is an 
unavoidable necessity that th e seeker must give his 
undivided attention to it, and must, on all occasions, 
maintain in his mind a continuous consciousness of the 
Divine. A mere intellectual study of the scriptures will not 
help us in purifying and shaping our "within' to the 
glorious Beauty of the Divine. It is necessary that we must 
pour out our mind and intellect into the scheme of living 
that the Upanishads advise.  
WHO HAS SUBDUED THE SENSES --- The Shraddha and 
Jnana explained above will not sustain themselves, and no 
seeker can consistently hope to entertain them unless he is 
constantly striving his best to live in a spirit of self-control. 
It is the sense-organs that se duce us away into the life of 
excessive sensuousness, and when one has entered into 
the troubled waters of a sensuous life, one has no chances 
of maintaining oneself quietly in the higher values of life. 
To walk the Path-Divine is to get out of the gutters-of-
sensuousness. Excessive sense-life and Absolute God-life 
are antitheses to each other; where the one is, the other 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
333 
 
cannot be. Where the light of inward serenity and deeper 
peace have come, the darkness created by sense passions 
and animal appetites must depart. It is imperative, 
therefore, that a seeker should learn to live in steady and 
constant sense-control.  
Why should we live renouncing sense enjoyments, and 
employing our mind in remembering constantly the 
Divine goal of life, with faith both in ourselves and in the 
science of religion? Ordinarily, an intellect can enquire 
only as to the cause-and-effect  of things. The ego is ever 
employed in its own motive -hunting. A seeker in the 
initial stages of his self-development remains constantly in 
his intellect. Naturally, he will enquire what the result of 
such a conspicuous sacrifice would be. To convince him, 
the second line is given.  
That a seeker who lives the above-mentioned triple-
programme of Divine life, reaches the State-of-
'Knowledge' is the promise and guarantee of the Rishis, 
who are the authors of the immortal scriptures. A doubt 
again arises as to why we should, after all, acquire the 
'Knowledge-Divine.' Krishna explains here that, having 
gained the right-knowledge, the individual "SOON 
REACHES THE SUPREME PEACE." The promise of 
reaching the great Goal-of-life is not guaranteed to take 
effect in a definite period of time. Just as, in the previous 
stanza, it was said, "In good time" ( Kalena), so too, here it 
is said, "Ere long" ( Achirena). In short, after gaining this 
'Knowledge,' one would "soon" reach the Goal-of-life.  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
334 
 
SUPREME PEACE ( Param Shantim) --- The Goal-of-life is 
labelled here as the "Great Peace" that knows no 
diminution. In these days of  peace-mongers getting ready 
for war in the name of peace, one is apt to become 
honestly sceptical about the go al indicated in this stanza. 
The term 'peace' here is not that undefined vague concept, 
that is often repeated in politics, whenever it is convenient 
for a set of politicians to do so, but the term Shanti has a 
wealth of psychological suggestiveness.  
It is very well-known that every living creature is, at all 
moments, trying to gain a better happiness, through all its 
activities in life. From breathing and eating, to the 
organised endeavour in capturing the world-market 
through war and destruction, all activities are attempts by 
the frail individuals to discover a greater and a better joy 
or happiness. This is true not only in man but in the 
animal kingdom, and even in the vegetable world. In 
short, no action is possible unless the actor is motivated by 
an inner urge in him to seek  a greater sense of fulfilment 
or joy unto himself.  
If thus, the whole world is st riving to win the highest joy 
that it possibly can, and having gained it, to invest all 
energy and intelligence to retain the same, then the goal of 
life should be ABSOLUTE-HA PPINESS, where all strife 
ends, all desires are fulfilled, all thoughts and agitations 
are finally exhausted. Desires for joy give rise to thought 
disturbances, which, trying to fulfil themselves in the 
outer world, become the visibl e actions in everyday life. 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
335 
 
The restlessness of the mind and the weary fatigue of the 
body shall both end, when Absolute Joy is attained. 
Therefore, Absolute Joy is Absolute Peace.  
Here, in this stanza the Goal-of-life is indicated as the 
Supreme Peace, which may be, in other words, explained 
as the Supreme Joy.  
 
THOU SHALT NOT DOUBT THIS, FOR DOUBT IS 
MOST SINFUL. HOW?... LISTEN:  
40. The ignorant, the faithless, the doubting-self goes to 
destruction; there is neither this world, nor the other, nor 
happiness for the doubter.  
In the previous verse it was said that those who had faith 
and knowledge would soon reach the Supreme Peace. In 
order to hammer this very same  Truth in, Krishna is here 
emphasising through a negative declaration that they, 
who have NOT these qualities cultivated, gained and 
developed in them, will get themselves ultimately 
destroyed and completely ruined. He who has neither the 
"Knowledge-of-the-Self" --- if no t a spiritual realisation, at 
least a clear intellectual understanding --- nor "the 
intellectual readiness to grapple with and fully 
understand the true import of the scriptural declarations 
and the words of the Masters" ( Shraddha), Krishna asserts, 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
336 
 
will certainly get ruined, if he be also a 'doubting Thomas' 
(Samshaya-atma).  
In the next line, Krishna, wi th all emphasis, condemns 
such men of endless doubts, and points out their tragedy 
in life. The Lord says that  such men who "DOUBT THE 
SELF" will not find any joy or happiness ANYWHERE --- " 
NEITHER HERE NOR IN THE HEREAFTER." In 
explaining thus, the Geeta seems to express that there may 
be a small chance perhaps, for one who is devoid of 
knowledge and faith to discover some kind of a happiness 
in this world, here and now, but that those who are 
constant doubters can enjoy neither here nor there. Such 
men are psychologically incapable of enjoying any 
situation, because the doubti ng tendency in them will 
poison all their experiences. He whose teeth have become 
septic must constantly poison the food that he is taking; so 
too, those who have this tendency of doubting everything, 
will never be able to accommodate themselves to any 
situation, however perfect an d just it might be. The line 
contains a spot of satire, almo st vitriolic in its pungency, 
when it is directed against the intelligent sceptic.  
WHEREFORE: --- FOR THIS REASON ONLY:  
41. He who has renounced actions by YOGA, whose doubts are 
rent asunder by 'Knowledge, ' wh o is self-possessed, actions do 
not bind him, O Dhananjaya.  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
337 
 
This being the penultimate verse in the chapter, it is a 
beautiful summary of all the main secrets-of-life explained 
at length in it. When, through the practice of Karma Yoga, 
we have learnt to renounce our attachments to the fruits-
of-action, and yet to work on in perfect detachment --- 
when every doubt in us regarding the Goal-of-life has 
been completely removed in our own inner experiences of 
the nobler and the diviner in us  --- as a result of the above 
two, the ego comes to rediscove r itself to be nothing other 
than the Atman. Then the individual ego comes to live 
"POISED IN THE SELF AS TH E SELF." When such an 
individual works, his actions can never bind him.  
It is only egoistic activities motivated by our ego-centric 
desires that leave gross impressions on our inner 
personality, and thus painfu lly bind us to reap their 
reactions. With a sense of  detachment and in right-
knowledge, as indicated in the above scheme, when an 
individual has completely destroyed his ego-sense, his 
actions cannot bind him at all. As a dreamer, I might 
commit a murder in my dream, of my dream-wife, but 
when I awake from my dream, I shall not be punished for 
the crime that I seem to have committed in my dream. For, 
the dreamer has also ended along with the dream. The 
dreamer committed the murder and deserves punishment; 
but in the waker, the dreamer is absent. Similarly, the ego-
centric actions can bind and throttle only the ego, but 
when the ego has become Atmavantah, meaning "POISED 
IN THE SELF" --- just like th e dreamer when he gets 
poised in the waker --- the activities of the ego can no 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
338 
 
more bind the Self. The ego "POISED IN THE SELF," is the 
experience of the Real Self ; the dreamer poised in the 
waker, is the waker.  
THIS BEING THE WONDROUS RESULT AND THE 
SUPREME PROFIT THAT 'TRUE-KNOWLEDGE' CAN 
GIVE TO THE DELUDED, KRISHNA ADVISES ARJUNA:  
42. Therefore with the sword-of-Knowledge, cut asunder the 
doubt-of-the-Self, born of 'ignorance, ' residing in your heart, 
and take refuge in "YOGA. " Arise, O Bharata.  
In this concluding stanza the Lord's advice is precise and 
it is given with a loving insistence. The stanza rings with a 
spirit of paternal urgency felt by the Lord towards the 
Pandava Prince.  
In the language of war, Krishna advises his warrior-friend 
on the battle-field, how best to live the life of dedication 
and perfection as advised by the Hindu Rishis from the 
quiet and peaceful Himalayan valleys. With the "SWORD-
OF-KNOWLEDGE," Arjuna is encouraged to cut off the 
bonds of ignorance and 'CLEAVE ASUNDER THIS 
DOUBT-OF-THE-SELF LYING IN THE HEART."  
The spiritual doubt is explained here as working from the 
heart. This may read rather strange to a modern man: 
doubt must come from the intellect; it cannot come from 
the heart.  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
339 
 
It is the traditional belief in Vedanta that "the intellect is 
seated in the heart," wherein the term HEART does not 
mean the fleshy pumping- instrument in the human 
bosom. The term HEART is used here not in its 
physiological meaning but in its literacy usage, where 
HEART means "the source of all love and sympathy --- of 
all noble human emotions." An intellect functioning from 
and through an atmosphere of sympathetic love, kindly 
charity and such other noble qualities alone can be 
considered in the science of philosophy as the human 
reason. Therefore, when the Upanishads talk of the doubts 
lying crystallised in the heart, the Rishis mean the 
intellectual perversions in some  of the seekers that make 
them incompetent to feel and appreciate the Vision-of-the-
Soul.  
These doubts can be completely annihilated only when 
the individual gains an intimate, subjective experience of 
the Self in him.  
This can be achieved only by Yoga --- NOT a strange 
mystical process, secretly advised to a few, by 
mysteriously rare groups of Gurus, to be practised in the 
unknown dark caves of the Himalayas, living altogether a 
frightful life of unnatural privations. In the Geeta, the 
word Yoga has been forever tamed and domesticated to be 
with all of us, serving us faith fully at all times in our life. 
By the term Yoga, in this last stanza, Krishna means the 
"twelve techniques" which he has explained as the 
subjective-Yajnas.  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
340 
 
The chapter concludes with a spirited call to Arjuna: 
"ARISE, O BHARATA." In th e context of the Geeta, 
though the word may be rightly said to mean only a call to 
Arjuna, it is a call to every seeker --- especially to this 
country as a whole --- to get up and act well in the spirit of 
Yajna, and thereby to gain more and more inner purity, so 
that  
through true meditation everyone of us can come to 
experience and gain the Supreme Peace which is the final 
fulfilment of evolution.  
Thus, in the UPANISHADS of the glorious Bhagawad Geeta, 
in the Science of the Eternal, in the scripture of YOGA , in the 
dialogue between Sri Krishna and Arjuna, the fourth discourse 
ends entitled: THE YOGA OF RENUNCIATION OF 
ACTION IN KNOWLEDGE 
Om Om Om Om Om 
 
