Chapter 9
Raja Vidya Raja Guhya Yoga 
 
The Yoga of Royal Knowledge and Royal Secret  
 
The Blessed Lord said: 1. To you who do not cavil, I shall now 
declare this, the greatest secret , the most profound knowledge 
combined with experience (or realisation) ; which having 
known, you shall be free from the sorrows of life.  
Lord Krishna has found, in Arjuna, one who is really 
anxious to evolve. Only, he wanted help from some 
quarter, to develop in himself an intellectual conviction 
for the way-of-life he was to pursue. The Lord says that 
He will declare the philosophy of Arjuna, "WHO DOES 
NOT CARP OR CAVIL," and the benefit of this 
knowledge and its practical application has also been 
indicated in this stanza; "HAVING KNOWN WHICH, 
YOU SHALL BE FREE FROM ALL LIMITATIONS OF 
FINITE EXISTENCE."  
An individual becomes incapabl e of facing the challenges 
of life and meeting its rising demands, because, in his false 
estimation of things and beings, he comes to play out of 
tune with the whole orchest ra of life. To understand 
ourselves and the world outside, is to know the secret of 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
622 
 
keeping a healthy and happy relationship with the world 
outside. He, who is capable of tuning himself up thus with 
the whole, is the one who is marked out for sure success 
and complete victory in life.  
Because of his internal mala djustments, we found Arjuna, 
the hero of his age, behaving as a shattered personality. 
Such an individual, split in himself, comes to feel the 
problems of life too heavy, th e duties of life too irksome, 
and life itself too much to be ar. All those, who thus allow 
the engine of life to run over  them and crush them down, 
are termed as Samsarins. Those who know the art of self-
development can easily learn how to steer the engine of 
existence from its driver's seat, safely around every 
impediment, and they are the Men-of-Realisation, the 
Saints, and the Sages. This stat us is the heritage of man --- 
of every intelligent person, who has the enthusiasm and 
the courage to master life and live like a God upon earth 
ruling over the circumstances, and smiling at the 
adversities.  
TO GENERATE AN ALL-OUT ENTHUSIASM IN THE 
ART OF LIVING, WHICH EACH STUDENT HAS TO 
BRING ABOUT IN HIS OWN LIFE, THE ART OF SELF-
PERFECTION IS PRAISED IN THE FOLLOWING:  
  
2. Royal Science, Royal Secret, the supreme purifier is this, 
realisable by direct intuitive knowledge, according to the  
DHARMA, very easy to perform, imperishable.  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
623 
 
Vedanta is no religion in the ordinary concept of the term, 
which implies the formalistic observance of some physical 
and mental discipline, in some House of God, during a 
specific day of the week, for a prescribed length of time. If 
we consider religion as an "Art of Right Action," then 
Vedanta is indeed the noblest of religions, because it 
provides a scientific explanation for the entire way of right 
living. Krishna here glorif ies it: "THIS IS THE ROYAL 
SCIENCE, THE ROYAL MYSTERY, PURE AND VERY 
HIGH."  
Even if there be a Science, royal in its import, deep in its 
profundity, and "supreme in it s purifying effect," unless it 
be available for our comprehension, it is almost useless. 
Here, Krishna promises that it is "CLEARLY 
COMPREHENSIBLE," since it can be apprehended 
directly by an immediate experience of the Self.  
Also it is a science "pertaining to Dharma" ( Dharmyam). 
The term Dharma has already been explained. Man is 
nothing but a parcel of mineral s in their gross and subtle 
states, if the Conscious Prin ciple were not blessing them 
with awareness. This Awareness, called the Self, is then 
the Dharma of man, the Principle o f  L i f e  i n  h i m .  t h e  
Spiritual Science, that the Lord of Vrindavana promises to 
enunciate in this chapter, is neither the physical science of 
the biology of the objects of the world, nor the science of 
psychology that explains the field of emotions and 
thoughts --- but the Science of the Self, the deepest essence 
in each individual.  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
624 
 
VERY EASY TO PERFORM --- Religion is a subjective 
technique to be pursued and accomplished by each in 
himself. If this great science, into which Lord Krishna is 
proposing to initiate Arjun a, is an extremely difficult 
proposition in life, then, naturally, it is a futile philosophy. 
The poverty of a country is not removed by the 
declaration of its scientists th at there are inexhaustible 
quantities of unclaimed gold, awaiting free transportation, 
on Mars! In order to remove this vague fear, it has been 
fully confirmed that the tec hnique of self-integration and 
the ultimate gaining of complete mastery over oneself is 
an art easy to master for the sincere and the diligent.  
Even if it be easy, no inte lligent man can pursue the path, 
if the gain acquired thereby is perishable and temporary. 
It is endorsed here that the gains acquired through a 
faithful pursuit of this Royal Science of self-development 
and self-mastery are "OF AN IMPERISHABLE NATURE." 
To realise the Self is to beco me the Self, the Eternal, the 
Infinite Reality behind the phenomenal world of 
appearances.  
AS A CONTRAST TO THOSE WHO ARE SEEKING, THE 
DESTINY OF THOSE WHO ARE NOT SEEKING THE 
IMPERISHABLE IS DECLARED TO BE THE DISTURBED 
LIFE OF SAMSARA:  
  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
625 
 
3. Persons without faith in this  DHARMA (the Divine Self) , 
O Parantapa, without attaining Me, return to the path of 
rebirth, fraught with death.  
Those who live in complete disregard of the Self, 
necessarily "RETURN WITHOUT ATTAINING ME." Men 
of extroversion, meditating upon the sense objects and 
bartering away their intellectual capacities, emotional 
powers, and physical strength for seeking, acquiring and 
possessing the implements to  work out their sensual 
satisfaction, must necessarily  return to "THE PATH OF 
REBIRTH, FRAUGHT WITH DEATH."  
The more an individual medita tes upon the finite, strives 
to gain the changeable, and ge ts choked by the sorrows of 
the perishable, the more he comes to worship and court 
the lower nature of the Self, the Prakriti. However big the 
ocean may be, a drop of it, taken from anywhere in its 
infinite expanse, should taste saline. In the same way, 
whatever be the motive behi nd the courting, once we 
allow ourselves to be courtier s of the world-of-objects, we 
are doomed to taste the saline tears of sorrow, because of 
the very ephemeral nature of the "objects of our love."  
The world of names and forms is finite and ever-changing. 
At every moment, every object is living through a process 
of change, and each change is death to the previous state 
of existence of the object. Thus, the term "death" used here 
by Krishna in his phrase "F RAUGHT WITH DEATH" is to 
be understood in this liberal meaning of the term. In short, 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
626 
 
courtiers of the finite reach th e tragic realms of constant 
death.  
In the perfect Science of Vedanta, though Shraddha also 
implies "faith" in the Tagorean sense of the term, it is not 
built upon the misty vapours of emotionalism, but upon 
the solid beams of intellectual understanding and perfect 
awareness of the logic of thought behind the theory. 
Shankara defines Shraddha as the "moulding of the life and 
living, on the basis of right intellectual comprehension of 
what the scripture indicates and the teachers explain." It is 
the enduring faith that lifts us  to realms beyond the reach 
of the mind and intellect, an d helps to carve out of the 
mortal and the finite, the Immortal and the Infinite.  
Something without which a subs tance cannot be that very 
substance is called its Dharma or essence; e. g., heat in fire, 
cold in ice. Those who have no faith in the Divine Essence, 
which is the Self in them, get easily abducted by the 
cooings of their emotions, or the barkings of their intellect, 
or the whisperings of their flesh. They slip into devolution 
and come to live as biped anim als, when they lose their 
faith in the Divine core which is the Essential Being. A 
mad king, who has forgotten his own kingship, throws his 
kingly dignity to the winds and runs about naked on the 
streets, behaving as though he were a homeless vagabond. 
Similarly, an individual, in hi s forgetfulness of the dignity 
of his essential Self-hood, comes to live in the open streets 
of sense pleasures, hunting for his satisfactions, as though 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
627 
 
he were nothing better than a crawling worm in some 
wayside ditch.  
Simple-looking though it be, this stanza is pregnant with 
untold suggestiveness. By contrasting thus the "Path-of-
Knowledge" with the "Path- of-Ignorance" in the most 
vivid terms, Krishna brings to the comprehension of 
Arjuna the advisability of the blessed path of Higher 
seeking, the realisation of the Imperishable.  
IN THE FOLLOWING, KNOWLEDGE IS THEREFORE 
GLORIFIED, WHEN KRISHNA EXPLAINS THAT 
DHARMA, WHICH IS TO BE FOLLOWED IS:  
  
4. All this world is pervaded by Me in My Unmanifest form 
(aspect) ; all beings exist in Me, but I do not dwell in them.  
ALL THIS WORLD IS PERVADED BY ME IN MY 
UNMANIFESTED FORM --- The subtlety of a thing is 
measured in terms of its perv asiveness and therefore, the 
Subtlest must necessarily be the All-pervasive. As all 
limited things must have forms, the All-pervasive alone 
can be Eternal and Infinite. All forms are perishable 
substances ( Dravya). Thus the Self, in its essential 
Unmanifest nature, must be pervading everything, as the 
mud pervades all forms and shapes in all mud-pots.  
If thus, the Infinite pervades the finite, what exactly is the 
relationship between them? Is it  that the finite rose from 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
628 
 
the Infinite? Or is it that  the Infinite PRODUCED the 
finite? Has the Infinite Itself become the finite, as a 
modification of Itself, or do  they both, among themselves, 
keep a father-son, or a master-servant relationship? 
Various religions of the world abound in such questions. 
The dualists can afford to indulge in such a fancied 
picture of some relation or other between the finite and 
the Infinite. But the Adwaitins (Non-dualists) cannot accept 
this idea, since to them the Eternal Self alone is the ONE 
and the ONLY REALITY.  
The second line of this stanza is a classical description of 
this "relationless-relation ship" between the Real and 
unreal. "All beings exist in Me but I dwell not in them." To 
a hasty reader this would strike as an incomprehensible 
paradox expressed in a jumble of empty words. But to one 
who has understood well the theory of super-imposition, 
this is very simple. The ghos t-vision can come only upon 
the post. And what exactly is the relationship between the 
ghost and the post from the standpoint of the post? The 
innocent post, in infinite love for the deluded fool, can 
only make a similar statement as the Lord has made here. 
"The ghost," the post would say, "is no doubt, in me, but I 
am not in the ghost; and therefore, I have never frightened 
any deluded traveller at any time." In the same fashion the 
Lord says here, "I, IN MY UNMANIFEST NATURE, AM 
THE SUBSTRATUM FOR ALL THE MANIFESTED" chaos 
of names and forms, but neither in their joys nor in their 
sorrows, neither in their births  nor in their deaths, "AM I 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
629 
 
SHARING THEIR DESTINIE S, BECAUSE I DO NOT 
DWELL IN THEM."  
This line sounds a faithful echo of the same idea, perhaps 
more crisply expressed earlier (VII-12), where it was said 
"I AM NOT IN THEM, THEY ARE IN ME." In short, it is 
indicated here that the Self which, through Its 
identification with the matter-envelopments, has come to 
"DWELL IN THEM," is the pain-ridden mortal, while the 
same Self which has successfully withdrawn all Its false 
arrogations with the matter layers and has come to realise 
that, "I DO NOT DWELL IN THEM" is the Self, Immortal 
and Unmanifest.  
THEN THERE MUST BE SOME SORT OF AN 
EXISTENCE FOR THE FINITE IN THE INFINITE:  
  
5. Nor do beings exist (in reality)  in Me --- behold My Divine  
YOGA supporting all beings, but no t dwelling in them, am I 
My Self, the 'efficient-cause' of all beings.  
Continuing the strain of His arguments in the previous 
stanza here He says, "NOR DO THINGS EXIST IN ME," 
although "I DWELL NOT IN THEM." Now here he says 
that in the Infinite, never has the finite ever risen! 
Continuing our example of the post and the ghost this is 
equivalent to the post declaring that, "in me, the electric 
post, never has a ghost existed." In Pure Awareness, in Its 
Infinite Nature of sheer Knowledge, there never was, 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
630 
 
never is and can never be any world of pluralistic 
embodiment, just as, for the waker, the pleasures of the 
dream world ARE NEVER AVAILABLE. In short, at the 
time of the direct subjective experience of the Self there is 
no cognition of the pluralistic world, which is born out of 
the forgetfulness of the Infinite.  
The Self "BRINGS FORTH AND SUPPORTS ALL 
BEINGS" just as the ocean gives birth to, supports and 
nourishes all the waves in it. "AND YET," says Krishna "I, 
MYSELF NEVER DWELL IN THEM." Just in the same 
way the ocean can cry that "I am never the waves." The 
mud is the womb of all pots, the sustainer of their shapes, 
the nourisher of their forms, and yet, none of the pots, nor 
all the pots put together, can ever define or give a total 
knowledge of the mud. Pure Consciousness, Divine and 
Eternal, is the Substratum th at sustains and illumines the 
entire panorama of the everchanging plurality.  
The objects of the world conv eying their stimuli through 
the doors of the sense organs create mental waves which 
are illuminated by the Consciou s Principle residing in all 
forms. If the Awareness is not there, the external world 
must necessarily fail in giving the mind-and-intellect the 
concept of its life as a series of unbroken experiences. Just 
as the cotton is in the cloth, or the gold in all ornaments, or 
the heat in the fire, so too, the Imperishable is in the 
perishable. The dreamer can function only in the waker; 
the waker pervades the dream-experiences, and at the 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
631 
 
same time, the waker is not in the dream nor in fact, when 
awakened fully, does the dream ever exist in the waker.  
KRISHNA FEELS THAT THE LANGUAGE OF 
PARADOX IS PROVING TOO MUCH OF A RIDDLE TO 
THE GROSS INTELLECT OF THE AVERAGE MAN IN 
ARJUNA, AND THEREFORE, IN HIS DIVINE 
KINDNESS, THE LORD PROVIDES FOR HIS DISCIPLE 
AN EXAMPLE:  
  
6. As the mighty wind, moving  everywhere, rests always in 
space (the  AKASHA ) , even so, know you,  all beings rest in 
Me.  
The confused Prince, trying to  solve the riddle, is helped 
here by the Kingly Teacher in Krishna who gives him a 
vivid example. To imagine a substance that exists 
everywhere, allowing everything to exist in it, but at the 
same time, it in itself not getting conditioned by the things 
that exist in it, is very diffi cult, and the ordinary intellect 
cannot easily soar to comprehend those heights of 
understanding and appreciation. As a prop for the 
ordinary intellect, to raise itself up so that it may peep 
over its own limitations and gain a vision of the 
unravelling expanse of the Infinite, here is a brilliant 
example.  
The gross can never conditio n the subtle. As the poet 
sings, "Stone walls do not a prison make," for, even 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
632 
 
though we may imprison the body of the prisoner, his 
thoughts are ever free to reach his kith and kin at their 
hearth. The gross stone walls cannot limit the flight of the 
subtle thoughts. If once this principle is well understood 
the example becomes very expressive exhibiting all its 
secret suggestions.  
KNOW YOU ARJUNA, that the winds curl, swirl and 
whirl around everywhere in space; the space supports and 
envelopes them everywhere, an d yet, they do not ever 
limit the space. This beautiful example, when meditated 
upon by any seeker, if he has at least an average amount 
of intellectual comprehension,  will enable him to define, 
in his own mind, the right relationship that exists between 
the Self and the non-Self. The Real supports the unreal; the 
unreal seemingly lives... through its history of misery and 
sorrows, fleeting joys and passing pleasures... in the Real 
and yet, the unreal can never condition the Real. When the 
wind is moving, the space need never move. None of the 
qualities of the wind is the quality of the space ( Akasha). 
Compared with the outstretching Infinite space, in which 
the universes keep on revolving, at a speed measured in 
light years, the atmospheric disturbances are only upto the 
height of a few miles off the surface of the globe. In the 
infinite vastness of the Real, the arena of disturbances 
caused by Its flirtations with Its own assumed self-
ignorance, is only a negligible area... and even there, the 
relationship between the fa lse and the Real is the 
relationship between the fick le breeze and the Infinite 
space.  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
633 
 
These two are stanzas not merely to be explained away by 
words, however true the commentator may be; they are to 
be meditated upon by the students, individually.  
THEN WHAT ABOUT YOUR WONDERFUL THEORY 
OF A SYSTEMATIC LAW OF REBIRTH --- THE STORY 
OF A CREATOR CREATING THE WORLD DURING HIS 
DAY-TIME --- AND DISSOLVING THE ENTIRE LOT 
DURING HIS NIGHT-TIME, ETC.?... LISTEN:  
  
7. All beings, O Kaunteya (O Son of Kunti) , go into My  
PRAKRITI (nature) at the end of a  KALPA; I send them forth 
again at the beginning of (the next) KALPA.  
  
8. Animating My PRAKRITI, I, again and again send forth all 
this helpless multitude of beings, by the force of nature  
(PRAKRITI) .  
The Eternal Brahman functioning through the equipment 
of the total mind is the God-principle, the Creator, and the 
same Absolute Brahman functioning through the limited 
individual mind-and-intellect is the individualised Self, 
the mortal ego ( Samsarin). The same Sun gets reflected in 
the clear still waters of a vast lake and in the disturbed 
muddy pool on the roadside ; the difference between the 
two distinctive reflections, in the different equipments, 
will explain the difference between the individual-ego and 
the God-principle. Just as the Sun in the sky can rightly 
say: "I am the cause for the br illiant reflection in the lake 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
634 
 
and the broken, dull reflection in the wayside puddle," so 
too Krishna, the Self declares: "I am the vital animating 
Reality behind the Creator, and also behind the created."  
The Adjunct of the God-principle, the total body-mind-
intellect equipment, constitu tes the lower nature of the 
Self, called the Prakriti. At the beginning of a cycle the 
existing vasanas in the lower nature get projected "and at 
the end of the Kalpa all beings go to My Prakriti."  
The act of invigorating or fertilising the Prakriti to grow 
up again into the tree-of- Samsara, is an act of grace from 
Brahman. If the Supreme Consciousness were not to 
identify with Prakriti, ( Maya), she, being inert in herself, 
cannot project forth any life at all. The entire multitude of 
vasanas, "I project again and again." When the Self 
animates Prakriti, the vasanas have no freedom at all to 
refuse expression because, THEY ARE HELPLESS 
UNDER THE SWAY OF PRAKRITI.  
In philosophy, the Rishis often explain the Universe from 
the standpoint of the macrocosm ( Samashti) which has a 
knack of confusing the stud ents, unless each student 
strives hard to understand its implications subjectively in 
himself, as microcosm ( Vyashti). Viewed thus, in the 
individual subjective inner-life-story, the statement proves 
to be indeed true, since without the life in us --- the Self --- 
identifying with the lower nature in us, the mind and 
intellect equipment cannot create the characteristic ego, 
which comes to suffer its limited existence.  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
635 
 
We have already found that the greatest scoundrel and the 
noblest saint are both the same when neither of them is 
identifying with his mind and intellect, in the state of deep 
sleep. On waking up, the scoundrel-mind projects a 
scoundrel, and the saintly-mind projects the saint; and the 
Vitality behind both is the same Spark-of-Life, 
Consciousness Absolute. Thus, the scoundrel is incapable 
of not behaving as a scoundrel, as much as the saint 
cannot, by any chance, play the scoundrel, even for a 
moment. The scoundrel is as helpless as the saint, both 
being "HELPLESSLY UNDER THE SWAY OF PRAKRITI" 
in each. And the entire d rama of the dissolution of vasana-
expressions and the projection of the vasana-dances is 
performed upon the Changeless Imperishable Eternal 
platform of the Self; "I PROJECT AGAIN."  
THE LAW OF KARMA IS INCONTROVERTIBLE AS THE 
ACTION SO THE REACTION. IF THE SELF 
ADMINISTERS THE DISSOLUTION AND SUPERVISES 
THE PROJECTION OF THE PLURALISTIC WORLD, 
HOW FAR DOES THE LAW OF KARMA SHACKLE THE 
INFINITE?... LISTEN:  
  
9. Sitting like one indifferent, and unattached to these acts, 
Dhananjaya, these acts do not bind Me.  
In the case of the limited ego, its ego-centric actions leave 
their impressions behind, which ultimately persecute the 
little ego with their reactions. All ego-centric actions, 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
636 
 
which are always motivated by selfish desires, leave their 
ugly foot-prints upon the shores of the mind ( Vasanas), 
while actions which are not ego-motivated leave no trail 
(Vasanas), as birds leave no foot-p rints as they move along 
in the sky. We can compare an  ungrateful son kicking his 
own father, with an innocent child in a playful mood 
kicking his own father, with both its legs. A philosopher's 
subtle vision is not necessary  to understand the difference 
in texture between these two persons performing the same 
action --- kicking the father. Wherever and whenever an 
ego-centric action, whipped by selfish desires, is 
undertaken, gross and painful reactions ( Vasanas) must 
necessarily ensue.  
In the case of Eternal animating Its Prakriti, and projecting 
out "AGAIN AND AGAIN THE MULTITUDE OF 
BEINGS," there is neither any attachment ( Raga) nor any 
aversion (Dvesha), and therefore, by this mere happening 
on the Eternal, the Supreme is not affected: "THESE ACTS 
DO NOT BIND ME." It is neither ego-centric nor desire-
motivated.  
However tragic and murderous the play may be, however 
tearful and sad the story be, however rainy and stormy 
the scene be, the white screen in the cinema hall at the end 
of the play carries neither the marks of the blood spilt, nor 
the stains of the tears shed , nor the wear and tear of the 
storm that raged. At the same time, we all know that but 
for the changeless screen, the story could never have been 
unravelled through the medium of light and shade. In the 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
637 
 
same fashion, the ever-pure In finite, as the Self, becomes 
the enduring platform for th e drama of sorrow that is 
expressed in the language of plurality, ceaselessly enacted 
by the infinite number of egos, helplessly repeating the 
parts ordered by their Vasanas, gathered by them in the 
past.  
The steam in the engine is not punished for the disaster of 
derailment, nor is the steam complimented when the train 
reaches its destination in time! Again, neither the disaster 
nor the successful accomplishm ent of the journey could 
ever take place without the steam. The engine without the 
steam is inert iron assembled in a particular shape, dull 
and heavy; it is the steam that dynamises and renders it 
capable of its actions of cruel destruction, or kindly 
construction, as the case may be. Since the steam in the 
engine has neither an anxiety to move the train, nor an 
aversion to move it, the steam is ignored in the 
achievements of the train, whet h e r  g o o d  o r  b a d .  I t  i s  t h e  
motive behind the action that determines its reaction.  
The Self is the source of a ll dynamism. It dynamises the 
mind. Each mind is a bundle of Vasanas. Good Vasanas 
make the mind sing the song of joy and harmony. Bad 
Vasanas in the mind make it groan with sobs and tears. 
The needle in the gramophone  is not responsible for the 
song that the record sings. As the record, so the music. 
Similarly, the Self is Eternal. It is unmindful of what type 
of world is projected forth. No r is It anxious in any sense 
of the term, to create a bette r world. Sunlight illumines 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
638 
 
whatever happens to be there in its light, be it a murder, 
or be it a martyrdom. Neither the glory of the martyr, nor 
the crime of the murderer can reach the Sun. The Self, as 
Pure Consciousness, illumines the Vasanas and lends them 
the capacity to project out, be it for the damnation of 
themselves or for their own glorification. "SITTING LIKE 
ONE INDIFFERENT AND UNATTACHED TO THESE 
ACTS" the Self revels in the realm of Its lower nature 
(Prakriti).  
WHAT EXACTLY IS THIS STRANGE RELATIONSHIP 
BETWEEN THE INFINITE AND THE FINITE? THE 
FINITE ACTS BECAUSE OF THE INFINITE, AND YET 
THE INFINITE IS SAID TO BE NEUTRAL... HOW?  
  
10. Under Me as her Supervisor, PRAKRITI (nature) produces 
the moving and the unmoving; because of this, O Kaunteya, the 
world revolves.  
In Vedanta, this relationship between the actionless Self 
and the active non-Self has been brought out by a bunch 
of analogies, each one trying to throw much light upon 
this sacred tie of 'relationless-relationship.'  
The rays of the Sun warm up the objects upon which they 
fall, without warming the intervening medium through 
which they pass. Similarly, the Self remains in Its own 
Infinite glory, and the non-Self gets dynamised to act, as 
Prakriti, in the mere "presence" of the Self.  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
639 
 
The king gets a fancy that he should visit a given pilgrim 
centre on the full-moon day of the following month, and 
having expressed this intention to his minister, the king 
forgets all about it. But on the day prior to the following 
full-moon, the minister approa ches the king to remind 
him that it is time for the royal procession. The next day, 
when the king comes out, he finds that the entire route is 
thronged with his subjects. Welcoming arches are raised at 
different places. All detailed arrangements are planned 
out and colourfully executed for his royal visit, and 
return. All the officers and subjects have poured out all 
their capacities and endeavour to make the royal trip to 
the temple a great success.  
In all these feverish activities, everyone gained his 
authority and power only because of the king, and yet, the 
king himself was nowhere in the picture. The minister had 
his sanction from the king, and therefore, his orders were 
faithfully executed by all others. Had the minister tried to 
organise such a show as an ordinary citizen, he would 
never have succeeded. Similarly, in the mere presence of 
the Self, Prakriti borrows her sanction to plan and to 
execute, to act and to achieve.  
Subjectively, this becomes more clear. The Atman, merely 
by Its "presence" illumines the mind and intellect and 
creates for the expression of their Vasanas an entire field of 
world-objects and the required  instruments of experience, 
constituted of the organs-of-perception and the organs-of-
action. "NATURE, WHILE I PRESIDE, GIVES BIRTH TO 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
640 
 
THE WORLD OF THINGS AND BEINGS" --- "Nature" 
here means "The Unmanifest, that gets projected forth as 
the manifest."  
The continued dance of the world-of-plurality to the 
rhythm of change and deat h is maintained in the 
"presence" of the Self; "THE WORLD WHIRLS ROUND 
AND ROUND BECAUSE OF THIS."  In the final analysis, 
the Self does nothing. It is the Prakriti that projects and 
executes; the Prakriti that gets animated in the proximity 
of the Self. It is the Light of  the Self that vitalises the 
Prakriti and makes her exist and act. That is all the 
relationship between the Self, the Purusha and the non-
Self, the Prakriti.  
This will become more clear if the student tries to 
understand this relationship exactly as the relationship 
that can exist between the wayside post and the ghost that 
is superimposed upon it by the deluded.  
IF THE SELF BE THUS THE ESSENTIAL REALITY IN 
EVERY FORM AND IF IT BE EVER FREE FROM THE 
SORROWS AND TRIBULATIONS OF THE FINITE, WHY 
IS IT THAT ALL BEINGS ARE NOT ABLE TO IDENTIFY 
THEMSELVES WITH IT AND EXIST AS THE SELF?... 
LISTEN:  
  
11. Fools disregard Me when I dw ell in human form; they know 
not My Higher being as the Great Lord of all beings.  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
641 
 
In the seventh chapter, while giving a discourse upon the 
"Higher" and "Lower" natures of the Eternal, Krishna 
declared that the FOOLISH, in their ignorance of the 
Supreme State of the Higher Self, as Immutable and 
Transcendental, regard the "Unmanifest" as having come 
into manifestation. In this chapter while claiming to be the 
Self in all, Krishna uses the same strong word, 'fools,' to 
condemn those who cling to the form and lose the essence. 
"UNAWARE OF MY HI GHER NATURE, FOOLS 
REGARD ME" as dwelling in a particular form only!  
To mistake the idol for Go d, or the form of the Guru for 
the Infinite, is to mistake the container for the contents. An 
idol is only a symbol ( Pratika) for an imperceptible and 
s u b t l e  T r u t h .  T o  p l a y  w i t h  t he milk-bottle is not to feel 
refreshed when one is hungry or thirsty; playing with a 
spoon and fork over an empty plate is no satisfaction 
when one is really hungry. To mistake the idol to be itself 
the goal is to mistake the me ans for the end. And such a 
misunderstanding alone breeds fanatics, who sow seeds of 
rivalry and jealousy, to reap, in time, a harvest of death 
and disaster, all in the name of their stone-deities, 
wooden-symbols, or brass-gods! Three tiny bits of 
coloured khadi-cloth may make the national-flag, but that 
is not my mother-land; but when I bow my head as my 
country's flag goes up, I am adoring my nation; the flag is 
the sacred symbol of my country's culture and its 
aspirations.  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
642 
 
With this idea in mind, if we read the stanza it becomes 
very vivid and clear. The Lo rd says: "ordinary devotees 
are unaware of My real status 'AS THE GREAT LORD OF 
ALL BEINGS'," and adds th at these deluded "FOOLS 
SCORN ME WHEN I DWELL IN HUMAN FORM," 
meaning, when they consider Him, the Self, as merely a 
human-form, which He may take  for Himself, to bless a 
particular generation.  
WHY ARE THE FOOLS RENDERED INCAPABLE OF 
RIGHT UNDERSTANDING AND CORRECT 
JUDGEMENT REGARDING THE TRUE NATURE OF 
THE SELF?  
  
12. Of vain hopes, of vain actions, of vain knowledge, and 
senseless, they verily are possesse d of the delusive nature of 
RAKSHASAS and ASURAS.  
  
13. But the MAHATMAS (great-souls) O Partha, partaking of 
My divine nature, worship Me with a single mind (with a mind 
devoted to nothing else) , know ing Me as the Imperishable 
Source of all beings.  
In order to drive home an argument, it is the style in 
Krishna's discourses that He always brings the contrasting 
factors together so that each may come to shine all the 
more against the background supplied by the other. Here 
is a pair of stanzas in which, if the former explains the low 
men deluded to pursue their baser nature ( Rakshasas and 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
643 
 
Asuras), the latter paints the picture of the great-souls 
(Mahatmas), possessed of all the divine qualities.  
Deluded by false desires and wearied with false activities 
to fulfil those wrong desires, some become confused in 
intellect and totally confounded in their reasoning. Such 
people lose all divine perspective and become monstrous 
in their activities, expressing nothing but their demoniac 
sensuous nature at all times. Such men are called here as 
Rakshasas and Asuras, belonging to the tradition of Ravana.  
The actions undertaken in  the present leave their 
impressions on the mind, and order the future desires and 
thoughts in the individual. Out of vain actions, only 
negative Vasanas can arise, and they can only thicken the 
dull-witted stupidities of the intellect. When an individual 
has lived in this ditch of falsehood and impurity, he 
cannot become any nobler than a monster, in the eyes of 
the "wise".  
As a contrast to this Rakshasa-culture, we are shown how 
men-of-Wisdom feel and act. This dissection of man's 
bosom reveals to the seekers of self-development, the right 
attitude they must adopt and the correct perspective with 
which they must look at the things of the world.  
THE GREAT-SOULS POSSESSED OF THE DIVINE 
NATURE of the Self, and desiri ng this Infinite, seek the 
Immortal by realising the Self, "THROUGH SINGLE-
POINTED SELF-APPLICATION." They "know Me to be 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
644 
 
the Origin of all beings"; an d those who know the mud to 
be the origin of all mud-pots, cannot fail to see the mud in 
all pots. So too, the true children of the Hindu culture, 
who understand the Divine Principle as the "Source-of-all-
beings," cannot but respect every other member of the 
society as they would respec t themselves. There is no 
greater and more effective socialism ever preached in the 
world. If the present generatio n is not able to understand 
the appreciate this spiritual socialism, which is the only 
panacea for the ills of the world, the reason for it has been 
already given in the preceding stanza --- it is because of 
the predominance of the Asuric forces in it.  
THE GREAT-SOULS "WORSHIP ME WITH THE 
SINGLE-POINTED MIND."... HOW?  
  
14. Always glorifying Me, strivi ng, firm in vows, prostrating 
before Me, and always steadfast, they worshipMe with devotion.  
Even though in the previous stanza, while describing the 
high-souls, (a) the "Path-of-Knowledge" was indicated, 
here the other two main "Paths" of self-integration and 
self-development are hinted at, viz., (b) single-pointed 
devotion and (c) selfless activity undertaken in the true 
Yajna-spirit.  
GLORIFYING ME ALWAYS --- The grossest type of 
glorification is done usually by a noisy crowd singing the 
Lord's glories with the accompaniment of equally noisy 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
645 
 
and crude instruments! But the implication of Kirtana is 
much more sacred. Indeed, to adore an ideal with 
reverence and devotion, and to sing His glories, at all 
times, continuously, is the s ilent act of a mind that has 
fully opened up to appreciate the ideal that one has learnt 
to glorify. The silent adorat ion of society by the social-
workers, or the steady flow of love that beams out from a 
man of Knowledge for the entire kingdom of the living, 
constitute a greater and a more potent type of Kirtana, 
than the type indulged in by the noisy crowds that 
assemble from their different fields of dubious activities, 
for a short period each day, only to return to the same 
dens of vices, after the Bhajana.  
STRIVING WITH FIRM RESOLVE --- These are simple 
logical facts that are generally overlooked by the seekers 
and they dig the graves for their own success in spiritual 
practices. The majority of people believe that some specific 
routine acts of devotional flavour pursued physically for a 
short period of time on particular days of the week, is all 
their part of the game. The rest  is for their imaginary gods 
to cook and bring in front of them, dressed to taste! This 
absurd, superstitious idea has nothing to do with the 
Science of Self-perfection, of  which religion constitutes its 
technical aspect.  
Constant and conscious effo rt is unavoidable if an 
individual is to get himself hauled out from his present 
ruts of wrong thinking and false valuations of life and 
living. The disharmony he experiences in life, and the 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
646 
 
wrong notes that are sung by the situations in life upon 
the harp of his heart are all due to the maladjustments in 
his instruments-of-experience. Their readjustment calls for 
continuous vigilance, non-stop self-application, and 
sincere pursuit.  
Of course, while thus striving for self-redemption, 
vacillations caused by instinctive biological temptations 
would often reach the seeker to whisper in his ears and 
make him eat the 'FORBIDDEN FRUIT.' But at such 
moments of strong temptations, he must make a firm 
resolve ( Dhridha-Vratah) to reject the false and to walk 
steadily the path-of-the-Real.  
True devotion is unalloyed love. Love is measured in 
terms of the lover's identification with the beloved. 
Devotion to "ME, THE ORIGIN OF BEINGS, AND THE 
IMMUTABLE" is the way for the deluded ego to identify 
itself with the Self. And this  is brought to a successful 
culmination only by the process of detaching itself from 
its non-Self conditionings. Th is negative aspect of self-
withdrawal from the layers of the non-Self is indicated by 
the "BOWING DOWN TO ME." The positive side of the 
art of Self-realisation is pu rsued, when, with a steady 
single-pointed mind, the seeker comes to meditate till, 
ultimately, he re-discovers for himself his total 
identification with the Self. This positive aspect is 
indicated by the phrase: "IN DEVOTION."  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
647 
 
The withdrawal of ourselves from our misconceived 
identities and the final re-discovery of our infinite 
potentialities, through our constant devotion to the Self, 
can be achieved only by those among us who "ARE 
STEADFAST AND  
WORSHIP ME."  
The "Path-of-Knowledge" knows no flower-throwing or 
chandana-sprinkling methods of ritualistic worship. To 
keep in the mind an alert and vigilant flow of thoughts in 
our adoration for the nature of the Self as the Substratum 
of the entire Universe and the Essence in all beings is the 
truest worship that can open up the buds of our ego-
centric lives into blossoms of God-men, wafting their 
fragrance of Perfection around.  
  
15. Others also, offering the "W isdom-sacrifice" worship Me, 
regarding Me as One, as distinct, as manifold --- Me, who in all 
forms, faces everywhere.  
Jnana Yajna has no ritualism. It is a constant attempt on the 
part of the performer to see, in and through the 
experienced names and forms, the expression and vitality 
of the One Conscious Principle,  the Self. The seeker here, 
practising Jnana Yajna has understood the significance of 
the Vedantic assertion that the Immutable Self pervades 
all, penetrating everything, and in Its homogeneous web 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
648 
 
of existence, It holds together the phenomenal multiplicity 
and their variegated inter-actions.  
Chocolates made by different firms, irrespective of their 
shapes and colours, flavours and prices, are all chocolates 
and, therefore, their essential nature of sweetness is 
common to all of them; and the child who is seeking the 
sweetness of the chocolates will enjoy them, whatever be 
their shape, size, or packing.  
Similarly, a seeker of the Se lf watches for, observes and 
detects the expression of the Self in all forms and names, 
in all situations and conditions. Whatever be the setting in 
which diamonds are held together, to a diamond 
merchant all of them are so many points of brilliance and 
light, and he evaluates them according to the light-content 
in each one of them and not the design or beauty of the 
ornament.  
A man of realisation moves about the world, seeing his 
own Self, expressed through every movement and action, 
word and thought that clusters round him at all times. Just 
as one light in the midst of a thousand mirrors comes to 
provide crores of reflections everywhere, so too, the one 
centred in the Self, when he walks out into the world, sees 
everywhere his own Self danc ing, shooting glances at him 
from all around at once, thrilling him always with the 
homogeneous ecstasy of perfection and bliss.  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
649 
 
In the sparkle of the eyes, in the smile of a friend, in the 
grin of an enemy, in the h arsh words of jealousy and in 
the soft tones of love, in heat and in cold, in success and in 
failure --- among men, among animals, amidst the trees 
and in the company of the inert, everywhere, he 
successfully gains the auspicious vision of the Supreme, 
either as EXISTENCE PURE or as KNOWLEDGE 
ABSOLUTE or as BLISS INFINITE!! This is the meaning of 
Ishwara Darshana or the Atma Darshana which is sung so 
gloriously in all the scriptures of the world. To watch for 
and discover the smile of the Divine through the trellis of 
names and forms is to live in the constant spirit of Jnana 
Yajna.  
To adore Him in all visions,  to recognise Him in all 
situations, to feel Him with ea ch thought, is to live in a 
constant remembrance of the Self, and therefore, such 
people "worship the Self through the wisdom-sacrifice 
(Jnana Yajna)."  
In the beginning, this attempt of seeing the Self is a 
conscious act, not without its unpleasant strain. But as the 
seeker develops in his own spiritual cognition of the Self, 
the Awareness Divine within him, it becomes easy for him 
to recognise the One Self splashing Itself upon the myriad 
forms of Its own effulgent glory: "ME, WHO IN ALL 
FORMS FACES UP EVERYWHERE."  
The Man-of-Realisation not only experiences the Pure Self, 
uncontaminated by the plura listic equipments, but, also 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
650 
 
recognises the same Self as playing through the endless 
variety of conditionings available in the universe. Having 
known the one Sun in the sky, even if we see a thousand 
reflections of the same in different equipments, in all of 
them, we see and recognise only the one Sun.  
According to Vedanta, Self-realisation is not at all complete 
if the realised one can keep his composure and equanimity 
only in solitude and silenc e; if he recognises and 
experiences the Divine only at some rare moments of his 
transcendental experiences, then he is not the Man-of-
Wisdom glorified by the Rishis of the Upanishads. This is 
not the way of the Yogis. A Man-of-true-Knowledge is he 
to whom the Self alone is th e Truth within, without, and 
everywhere. "The One pervades all and nothing pervades 
It." To him a market place of the busiest tensions is as 
much a conducive place for cogn ising the Self as the quiet 
Himalayan valleys and their deep caves of roaring silence. 
With his eyes shut, he, from th e balcony of the Infinite in 
himself, gazes out to experien ce nothing but his own Self 
everywhere.  
In my legs as well as in my hands, I pervade equally at all 
moments. I know I am there. To say that this knowledge 
makes my hands and legs disappear, as mist disappears at 
sunrise, is sheer lunacy and not the assertion of a true 
science. Just as I permeate, exis t, enjoy, and experience in 
and through every little portion of my body, all through 
m y  w a k i n g  h o u r s ,  a t  o n e  a n d  the same time, so too, the 
man-of-Realisation realises that at all times, his own Self 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
651 
 
permeates the entire universe, in His Infinite domain --- 
"AS ONE, AS DISTINCT, AS MANIFOLD."  
Vedanta preaches the recognition of Divinity and the 
experience of the Infinite in and through life. It is not a 
passing experience lived through an accidental 
movement. It is not an occasion to celebrate by 
distributing laddus and then to retire for ever from that 
experience. Just as the knowledge acquired by an 
individual through his education keeps him constant 
company, at all times and in all conditions --- even in his 
dream --- even so, nay, much more powerfully, much 
more intimately, much more irredeemably, the "knower-
of-the-Self becomes the Self"; there is no doubt about it. 
The truth of the Vedantic declaration is upheld by the 
assertion in the second line: "ME, THE ALL-FORMED, 
THEY WORSHIP, AS ONE, AS DISTINCT AND AS 
FACING EVERYWHERE, IN EACH FORM."  
All that we have so far said is being endorsed here. No 
doubt, through meditation, when the mind is stilled, the 
Pure Self, the One-without- a-second, is realised. The 
knower of the mud can easily recognise the mud in all 
pots; the shape, size and colo ur of the pot do not destroy 
the mud. Similarly, the apparent and delusory names and 
forms, superimposed upon the Truth, cannot and do not 
veil the Truth from the "vision" of the Man-of-Truth. Not 
only does the Seer recognise the Self in each individual 
separately, but Krishna, the upholder of Vedanta thunders 
that the Truth is recognised "IN EACH FORM, AS 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
652 
 
FACING EVERYWHERE." It is absurd to say that one 
discovers the essential nature of the pot only on the right-
hand bottom of the mud-pot! The mud is in the pot, facing 
everywhere, at all times; where the mud is not, there the 
pot is non-existent. When the Self is not, there, the 
perception of the multiple existence is never possible.  
IF, IN A VARIETY OF FORMS, DIFFERENT TYPES OF 
WORSHIP ARE PERFORMED , HOW DO THEY ALL 
BECOME THE WORSHIP OF THE ONE SELF?  
  
16. I am the KRATU; I am the sacrifice; I am  the offering (food) 
to PITRIS (or ancestors) ; I am the medicinal herb, and all 
plants; I am the  MANTRA I am also the clarified butter; I am 
the fire; I am the oblation.  
Repeating the idea already expressed earlier in a famous 
stanza in the Geeta, (IV-24) this verse expresses how the 
Self is the existence everywhere, in all actions and factors 
constituting actions. Ritualistic actions constitute worship. 
At the time of the Mahabharata, divine worship was 
always undertaken in Vedic ritualism (Kratu), by ritualistic 
adoration of the deity as prescribed in the Smriti (Yajna), 
or by food-offerings for the ancestors ( Swadha). Arjuna is 
here taught that all these methods of worship are, in a 
sense, nothing but the worship of the Self.  
Not only are the different ritualistic prescriptions all 
presided over by the Self, but the medicinal herbs 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
653 
 
(Oushadha) used in the sacrifice, the ghee ( Ajya --- clarified 
butter) poured into the altar-of-fire the oblations ( Hutam) 
offered, the fire (Agni) that is invoked, the mantras chanted 
--- all of them are nothing but the Self alone expressed 
through different equipments in different fields. When a 
variety of ornaments is made  from a mass of gold, the 
gold can certainly say that "I am the pendant, I am the 
ring, I am the chain, I am its shine, I am its hook; I alone 
am its shape and its glory." Si milarly, the Self, being the 
essence of all happenings and circumstances in which the 
devotee attempts to adore the Eternal, this assertion here 
is perfectly acceptable to all philosophic-minded readers.  
AGAIN:  
  
17. I am the Father of this world, the Mother, the supporter and 
the grandsire; the (one) Thing to  be known, the Purifier, (the 
syllable) OM, and also the  RIK, the SAMA and the  YAJUH 
also.  
The Self is not a vague impercep tible Spirit of Existence in 
all fields of divine activities --- sans-emotion, sans-
relationship, sans-qualities. In order to show that there is 
an ardour of love that permea tes the very essence of the 
Self everywhere, the finite relationships of the world are 
mentioned to indicate the mass of  love that the Self is. "I 
AM THE FATHER, THE MO THER, THE SUSTAINER, 
THE GRANDSIRE, THE PURIFIER OF THE WORLDS."  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
654 
 
The verse insists, "I AM THE ONE THING TO BE 
KNOWN" --- and this is the repe ated assertion in all the 
scriptures. The Self is "That, having known which, 
everything else becomes known. " To know the Self is to 
destroy the consciousness of imperfection, the existence 
finite, the sorrows poignant. To live in the ego, as a mere 
embodied self, is to live self-exiled from all the Divine 
potentialities that one is heir to. To re-discover this infinite 
Beatitude is the only satisfying end and goal of life, where 
alone an awakened intellect can discover a haven of peace 
and an enduring existence in perfect tranquillity.  
The Self, the Substratum of  the entire universe, is 
symbolised by the Vedic mantra called Omkara. Life is 
conceived of as 'the flow during our waking, dreaming, 
and deep-sleep states.' The Substratum for these three 
states and their experiences mu st be something other than 
these three, inasmuch as the rider is always different from 
the ridden, the container is different from the contents. 
The Substratum is different from the superimposition 
upon it.  
This fourth-state, supporting and embracing the three 
ordinary states of consciousn ess in every one of us, is 
termed as Turiya by the Upanishad Seers. The one symbol 
representing all these four states is called Omkara, and 
naturally, therefore, the Ultimate indicated by OM, is the 
Self, conceived of, for the purpose of worship, as Krishna 
in Shrimad Bhagavata.  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
655 
 
The Self is the Essence indicated by OM, and this Absolute 
Reality is the One theme, tacitly expressed, or indirectly 
implied, in all the Vedas, and therefore, it is said "I AM 
ALSO THE RIK, SAMA AND YAJUH."  
FURTHER:  
  
18. I am the Goal, the Supporter,  the Lord, the Witness, the 
Abode, the Shelter, the Friend, the Origin, the Dissolution, the 
Foundation, the Treasure-house and the Seed Imperishable.  
Continuing the theme of the status of the Self as the very 
essence behind the seeming plurality of the world --- 
recognised in our ignorance, and in fact nothing but a 
dreamy superimposition gathering its existence from the 
Reality behind it --- the Lord describes Himself with a host 
of suggestive words strung together to form this exquisite 
verse, pregnant and full, for all students of meditation.  
I AM THE GOAL ( Gati) --- All our seeking ends when all 
imperfections vanish in the total experience of the Perfect. 
To one frightened by the vision  of a delusory serpent in a 
piece of rope, consolation and satisfaction can come only 
when his delusion has ended by the discovery of the rope. 
The Self is the Substratum of the sorrow-ridden universe 
of multiplicity; to realise the Self is to transcend all the 
choking sense of limitations. The Knowledge-Absolute by 
gaining which all becomes known, is shown here as the 
Self.  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
656 
 
I AM THE SUPPORTER ( Bharta) --- Just as the desert 
supports the illusory pool of water, which the thirsty 
traveller sees in his delusion, so too, the Self is the 
Supporter of everything. As Absolute-Existence It lends a 
semblance of reality to the perceptions of the sense organs, 
and thus holds together the flood-of-change into a 
consistent pattern, called life.  
I AM THE LORD ( Prabhu) --- Even though the Self thus 
lends Its grace to the realm of imperfections sustained and 
maintained by the agitations of the mind, as the Pure 
Awareness, It is ever beyond the sorrows and joys of the 
apparent and illusory univ erse. Through different 
equipments, electricity may pass, manifesting different 
expressions of its own glory, but in none of them does 
electricity lose itself, if we consider the current as pure 
energy.  
In all this panorama of expre ssions, the Self, though It 
lends Existence to them, Itself remains as a mere Witness. 
"I am the Witness" ( Sakshi) --- he is considered a true 
witness of an incident, "who is not in the incident, but 
who happened to witness it, not from too far, with neither 
attachment nor aversion." When things happen of their 
own accord in one's presence then one becomes the 
witness of that happening. The Infinite is but a witness of 
the finite inasmuch as the Self is an uninterested 
illuminator of what is happening in the harem of the 
intellect, in the arena of the mind, in the courtyard of the 
body, and in the wide expanse of the world without.  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
657 
 
I AM THE ABODE ( Nivasah) --- Truth is the House of all, 
of every being and thing. On an innocent wayside post, it 
is reported that some travellers saw a grinning ghost, 
others a smiling ghost, and yet others, a ghost with a 
bleeding mouth and sparkling eyes, naked and horrid, 
and some an innocent ghost, dressed in white, invitingly 
smiling and lovingly guiding th em onto the right track. 
All of them saw delusory proj ections of their individual 
minds upon the same wayside post. Naturally, the post is 
the "Abode," of the smiling,  of the grinning, of the 
bleeding, of the horrid, and of the tender ghost, that 
different minds, on different occasions, projected upon the 
same post. Similarly, wherever our equipments of 
experiences gain the appreh ension of the pluralistic 
phenomena, for all of them the Self, the Awareness, is the 
ABODE, the place of existence and security.  
I AM THE REFUGE ( Sharanam) --- Delusion breeds 
sorrows, Knowledge produces joy. The universe is pain-
ridden because it is delusion-projected. Naturally, the 
harbour of tranquillity, projecting a confused ego from the 
mountainous breakers of the stormy ocean-of- samsara is 
the rediscovery of the Substratum, the Essence of Self. 
When once the Self gets individualised, when it walks out 
to identify with the play, th rough the equipments of the 
intellect, mind and body, it is wandering away from the 
safety of the shore into the stormy, high seas of adventure. 
When the frail boat of the ego is thus threatened from all 
sides --- the darkening clouds  above, the bumping sea 
below, and the screaming storms all round --- the sailor's 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
658 
 
only refuge is to come back  to the tranquil harbour, the 
Self!  
The above descriptions put together, add up to give the 
conception of the Reality as a heartless noumenon, a 
dignified deity, an un-approachable realm of Perfection. 
To wipe off this idea from the tender heart of emotional 
seekers --- and Arjuna was one --- the Eternal, in the form 
of the beloved friend of man,  Krishna, is using here more 
humane terms in defining himself.  
I AM THE FRIEND ( Suhrit) --- The Infinite is a friend of 
the finite, not a nodding ac quaintance from whom you 
can borrow a match-box, but a friend, whose only anxiety 
is for the security and the well-being of the befriended.  
I AM THE ORIGIN AND DISSOLUTION, THE 
SUBSTRATUM, THE STOREHOU SE --- As gold in all 
ornaments and mud in all pots , the Self is in the whole 
universe, and therefore, all things can come to 
manifestation from and dissolve into the unmanifest, the 
substratum, which can hence be considered as the "the 
storehouse" of all names, forms and qualities that 
constitute the multiple world.  
I AM THE IMMUTABLE SEED (Beejam Avyayam) --- There 
is a contrast here with all other seeds, which perish when 
they germinate and produce trees. The Self is no doubt the 
Origin of the "Tree-of- Samsara," but in the production of 
this tree, the Self is not transformed, It being ever 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
659 
 
Immutable. The idea of the Eternal Principle, modifying 
itself to become the created world is a disgrace to the logic 
of human thinking, and Vedanta discards such a 
philosophically fallacious notion. The dualists, however, 
are compelled to take it up, or else, the very edifice of their 
arguments will crumble down lik e a castle of clouds, built 
upon an autumnal sky.  
This, as we have already indicated, is a verse replete with 
simple terms, each an avenue  for the meditator to reflect 
upon, and in a pleasant stroll reach the gateway  
of Truth.  
FURTHER:  
  
19. (As Sun) I give heat; I withhold and send forth the rain; I 
am Immortality and also death, both Existence and Non-
existence, O Arjuna.  
I GIVE HEAT --- The electrici ty can rightly say that it 
gives heat in the heater, light  in the bulb, cold in the 
refrigerator, because electricity conditioned through those 
equipments expresses itself as the above-mentioned --- 
heat, light and cold. Similarly,  the Self, the one Existence, 
identifying with the phenomenon called the Sun becomes 
the source of all heat for the entire universe.  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
660 
 
I WITHHOLD AND SEND FORTH RAIN --- Not only do 
the modern meteorologists understand the influence 
which the Sun has upon the c limatic conditions of the 
world, but the Rishis of old too had a perfect knowledge of 
the ways and behaviour of nature, and had well 
understood that the position, condition and nature of the 
Sun determines the climate that comes to bless, or curse, 
the world. The influence of th e Sun controls the fields of 
experience of every living creature on the globe, since it 
controls the climatic conditions. If the Sun were to send 
out a few more degrees of heat  the entire flora and fauna 
of the world would change. So too, will be the 
transformation, complete and total, of the entire look of 
the world, if the Sun were to withhold even a few calories 
of the heat that it is radia ting now. Immediately, there 
would be a march from the north pole and the south pole 
towards the equator, driving men and beings towards the 
central belt of the globe, causing more intense sorrows of 
over-population and lack of sufficient food!  
I AM IMMORTALITY AND ALSO DEATH --- If life, the 
Consciousness, were not illumining experiences, it would 
become meaningless and purposeless, and the Self, being 
the Spark of life, is the essential stuff that gives a realistic 
experience of existence to th e very phenomenon of death. 
To realise the Self as the Immutable and the Eternal, is  
to reach the State of Immorta lity. Change is death, and 
therefore, the phrase is to be  understood as saying that 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
661 
 
"the Self is the illuminator of change, Itself ever the 
Changeless."  
I AM EXISTENCE AND NON-EXISTENCE --- To perceive 
and experience 'Existence' and 'Non-existence,' a positive 
illuminator of both is necessary, and the illuminating 
Consciousness must be able to embrace both Sat and Asat 
in its all-comprehending Knowledge. It is impossible to 
know and gain an experience of the total Non-existence; 
wherever we experience Non-existence, we experience it 
as "the Non-existence that exists."  
Apart from this highly subtle philosophical interpretation 
there is a simpler significance for the phrase. Sat and Asat 
are terms used in Vedanta to indicate the 'cause' and 
'effect': the UNMANIFEST an d the MANIFEST. The Self 
being that Illuminating Factor --- without which we can 
experience neither the unmanifest (THOUGHTS) nor the 
manifest (OBJECTS) --- the Self  Eternal is conceived of as 
the Essence in both the manifest and the unmanifest. 
Without the mud, no pot is possible; with mud all pots 
can exist; and therefore, the mud can claim: "I am the pots 
of all sizes, shapes and colours."  
This stanza can provide a lifetime inspiration to the 
meditators at their seat of contemplation, while "barrelling 
their thoughts," before shooting forth into the voiceless 
and Nameless.  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
662 
 
THOSE WHO DEVOTE THEMSELVES IN THE 
WORSHIP OF THE ETERNA L WITH DESIRES, WILL 
COME TO THEIR FULFILMENT... HOW?  
  
20. The Knowers of the three  VEDAS, the drinkers of  SOMA , 
purified from sin, worshipping Me by sacrifices, pray for the 
way to heaven; they reach the holy world of the Lord-of-the-gods 
and enjoy in heaven the Divine pleasures of the gods.  
  
21. They, having enjoyed the vast heaven-world, when their 
merits are exhausted, enter the world-of-the-mortals; thus 
abiding by the inj unctions of the three  (VEDAS) , desiring 
(objects of) desires, they atta in to the state of "going-and-
returning" (SAMSARA) .  
When those who are well-read in the three Vedas and who 
know the prescriptions laid do wn for the rituals, perform 
those sacred acts of devotion and sacrifice with a desire to 
enjoy the celestial bliss, "THEY COME TO ENJOY, IN 
HEAVEN, THE DIVINE PLEASURES OF THE DEVAS."  
The Soma drink is the milky juice of a creeper-plant which 
is used in the rituals and taken in very small quantities at 
the end of the function. Thus, the phrase "DRINKING 
THE SOMA- J U I C E "  i s  t o  b e  u n d e r s t o o d  a s  ' w h e n  t h e  
performance of the ritual has concluded.' These desire-
prompted ritualisms yield finite results and Krishna 
indicates that these ego-centres, after having enjoyed in 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
663 
 
the celestial realms, "ENTER THE MORTAL WORLD ON 
EXHAUSTION OF THEIR MERITS."  
The disgust which the Lord f eels for such men and their 
unintelligent seeking for the fi nite, is clearly expressed 
when He concludes how thes e ritualists, "ABIDING BY 
THE INJUNCTIONS OF THE THREE VEDAS, DESIRING 
DESIRES. THEY REPEATEDLY COME AND GO."  
WHAT ABOUT THOSE MEN WHO WORSHIP THE 
ETERNAL WITH DESIRELESS LOVE, AS THE 
SUBSTRATUM FOR THE ENTIRE UNIVERSE?  
  
22. To those men who worship Me alone, thinking of no other, to 
those ever self-controlled, I secu re for them that which is not 
already possessed (YOGA) by them, and preserve for them what 
they already possess (KSHEMA) .  
Here is a stanza which, with equal emphasis, discloses a 
secret by which glorious success can be assured for the 
spiritual as well as the material seekers. It is significant 
that this stanza is almost in the centre of the Geeta. We 
shall try to follow the implications, both spiritual as well 
as secular, of this stanza, one by one.  
Those who, with a single-pointed mind, thus meditate 
upon Him as the One and th e Only Reality behind the 
entire universe, Krishna promises here that "TO THEM 
EVER SELF-CONTROLLED, I BRING YOGA AND 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
664 
 
KSHEMA," meaning more and more spiritual vigour 
(Yoga) and the final experience of Beatitude ( Kshema) 
which is liberation  
resulting from the fulfilled Yoga.  
Now, considering it as a tip for the men in the market-
place, sweating and toiling in  the world, the very same 
stanza yields a code of secret  instructions by which they 
can assure for themselves complete success in their 
worldly life. In any undertaking, if a man is capable of 
pouring out his self-willed thought ( sankalpa) constantly 
and with a singleness-of-purpose, he is sure to succeed. 
But unfortunately, the ordinary man is not capable of 
successfully keeping his thoughts in one channel of 
thinking. Therefore, his goal seems to be ever receding 
and flickering. His determinat ion to achieve a particular 
goal ever changes, since his goal itself seems to be ever-
changing. To such a man of haphazard determination, no 
progress is ever possible in any line of undertaking.  
The greatest tragedy of the age seems to be that we ignore 
the obvious fact that thoughts alone create. Activities gain 
a potency from the thought-power that feeds them. When 
the feeder behind is choked and dissipated, the execution-
power in the external activities  becomes feeble in strength 
and efficiency. Thoughts, from a single-pointed mind, 
must flow steadily in full inspiration, enthusiasm and 
vigour towards the determined goal which the individual 
has chosen for himself in life.  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
665 
 
Mere thinking, in itself, is no t sufficient. No doubt, actions 
are necessary. Many of the present-day youths, though 
capable of consistently maintaining a goal-of-life in their 
intellect, are not ready to get into the field and act as best 
as they can for its achievement. The term ' Upasana' means 
"worship." Through worship we invoke the deity, 
meaning "the profit potential in any given field" and the 
prefix Pari to this familiar term ' Upasana,' indicates a total-
effort in which no stone is left unturned for carving out 
one's victories in one's field of endeavour.  
So far, two main secret fact ors without which success in 
life will not be assured are revealed --- (a) CONSISTENCY 
OF WILLING AND THINKING , and (b) POURING OUT 
OURSELVES WITH A SINGLENESS OF PURPOSE in 
meeting the situation in its en tirety. The third main factor 
that is essential in the constitution of one who is marked 
out for spectacular success and brilliant gains in life is (c) 
SELF-CONTROL.  
As an aspiring individual, consistently maintaining his 
ambition in mind, walks out into his fields of activity to 
battle with the immediate problems, he will meet with 
many a tempting channel of more fascinating plans, 
through which he can dissipate himself and get 
exhausted, rendering himself incapable of conquering the 
highest success in his own field. To keep oneself SELF-
CONTROLLED, so that one may not thus get derailed as 
one shoots forward to reach th e temple of success, is the 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
666 
 
third great factor that is to be kept in mind and lived fully, 
in order that success in life be assured.  
The terms ' Yoga' and ' Kshema' defined as "the power to 
gain ( Yoga), and the power to guard ( Kshema)" 
respectively, by Shankara in his commentary, are quite 
applicable in the context of our discussion. In life, all 
conflict and contests, all struggles and sorrows, whatever 
be the form in which they may appear, are always 
different from individual to  individual, from place to 
place, and from time to time, and all of them distinctly fall 
into two groups, as (a) the st ruggles to gain, and (b) the 
efforts to guard what might have been gained. These two 
tensions tear into bits the jo y and tranquillity of life. He 
who is without these two preoccupations is the luckiest, in 
the sense that he has gained al l that is to be gained; and 
when these two factors are totally blotted out from one's 
life, one is dead to the world of sorrows --- and one 
awakens to the world of joy imperishable.  
It is promised here by the Lord that to the one who is 
capable of maintaining the th ree factors described above, 
and pursuing them diligently, there need be NO 
ANXIETY TO GAIN, NOR WORRY TO GUARD, because 
these two responsibilities will be voluntarily undertaken 
by the 'Lord Himself.' Here the term Lord may be 
understood as the "Law" be hind the world-of-plurality 
and all the happening therein. When water is let out from 
a height for purposes of irrigating the lower planes, we 
have only to allow it to flow in the right direction, to reach 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
667 
 
the required area --- and nature itself will carry it down, 
for, it is the 'law of nature' that water always flows from a 
higher to a lower level. Similarly here, to one who is 
working, fulfilling the three great laws pertaining to the 
physical, mental and intelle ctual disciplines, success 
SHALL dog the heels of such a careful ruler of 
circumstances.  
OPENING UP A NEW SECTION, TO DISCUSS THE 
MISGUIDED WORSHIPPERS , WHO ADORE AT THE 
ALTARS OF THE DEITIES THAT PRESIDE OVER 
FINITE, MATERIAL GAINS, THE FOLLOWING IS SAID:  
  
23. Even those devotees, who, endowed with faith worship other 
gods, worship Me alone, O son of Kunti, (but) by the wrong 
method.  
All the people in the world do not worship at the same 
altar. Not only is this physically impossible, but it is 
psychologically absurd, since ta stes differ from person to 
person.  
The devotees, during their respective worship at the 
different altars, adore the same Vitality that is the 
Substratum for the created world of change. Even when 
they worship different deities, if their devotion is 
sufficiently reinforced with perfect faith, they are invoking 
nothing but the one Eternal Truth expressed through the 
form of their adoration. When  once we accept the Infinite 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
668 
 
Reality as "One-without-a-second," remaining the same in 
the past, present, and future, it is evident that the Self, as 
Consciousness --- that expre sses through the equipments 
of all Saints and Sages, Prophets and Incarnations of the 
past --- is one and the same.  
Toleration is the very breath  of the Hindu creed, and we 
have already discussed earlier, how non-dualists, 
accepting the Absolute as Infinite, cannot but be tolerant. 
Intolerance is the creed of those who accept a single 
Prophet as God. Even among Hindus, all these who 
worship as members of a particular creed or sect, are 
generally found to be unrelenting fanatics. Some crude 
examples are even noticed where a devotee of one deity 
believes that, to utter blasphemies against the deities of 
others is adoration of his own beloved Lord! These are 
mere perversions, obnoxiou s and vulgar, which have no 
sanction in the Bible of the Hindus or anywhere in the 
cultural tradition initiated by  
the Rishis.  
The large-heartedness and endl ess love in the heart of 
Krishna makes him declare here that "THEY TOO 
WORSHIP ME ALONE, EVEN THOUGH BY WRONG 
METHODS."  
The stanza, viewed as an instruction for the external life in 
the work-a-day-world, suggest s that, instead of seeking 
the infinite profit of the Bli ss of Self-hood, those devotees 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
669 
 
who are trying to invoke other limited gains in the 
different fields of human activity, are also invoking the 
Grace of the Self --- only "BY THE WRONG METHOD."  
Even the most sensuous, when he is planning to earn, to 
save and to spend so that he may procure, possess and 
enjoy the sensuous objects, is invoking the dormant 
capacities that lie in the Self in him. Sans Self none will be 
able to act either negatively or  positively. Even in the case 
of suicide, a person is invoki ng Life, inasmuch as, even in 
the act of raising a weapon against himself, he is misusing 
the Grace of the manifested Life in him.  
In this context the phrase "BY THE WRONG METHOD" 
only indicates that ultimately , it leads the seekers to the 
wells of dejection and sorrow that lie in the darkness of 
the not-Self, instead of leadin g to the Bliss-of-Perfection 
which is the nature of the Self.  
WHY DO WE CALL THEIR METHODS AS "AGAINST 
WHAT THE LAW ORDAINS"?  
  
24. (For) I alone am the enjoyer in and the Lord of all sacrifices; 
but they do not know Me in Essen ce, and hence they fall (return 
to this mortal world) .  
In all ritualistic sacrifices, the Self alone is "THE ENJOYER 
AND THE LORD." It is the Self, in one form or another, 
expressing some special power that goes to form the 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
670 
 
different deities, for the invo cation of whom the various 
sacrifices are performed by the seekers of their grace. Here 
the Lord says "I am the Immutable Reality" that is behind 
all the deities that are invoked during every sacrifice with 
faith and devotion, be it in a Temple or a Church, in a 
Mosque or a Synagogue. But because they invoke "limited 
potentials in Me" ( Devatas) they do not come to realise 
"My Infinite Glory revelling as their Self," and therefore, 
jumping from one worship to another, they slip down to 
fall into delusory confusions and endless entanglements.  
Applying it to life, in all fi elds of activity wherein men 
strive ( Yajna), they are invoking some finite profit or the 
other (deity), and do not strive to improve spiritually so as 
to come to rediscover the Self as their own essential 
nature. Treading on the slippery slopes of sensuality, they 
fall to the levels of brutal animalism and prove themselves 
a disgrace to the dignity and status of man.  
Complete happiness and satisfaction, perfect contentment 
and peace, lie only in the innermost precincts of the bosom 
and not in the extrovert fields  of profit and success, glory 
and fame. Unmindful of this enduring profit that lies 
within themselves, men, bitten by a thousand scorpions of 
desire, run amuck --- bringing about chaos and sorrows 
not only to themselves but to others walking the same 
road. Necessarily, therefore, when a generation of such 
deluded people come to live, freely encouraging their own 
mental weaknesses, and never caring to pause and 
estimate their own actions, th e history of that period can 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
671 
 
be written only upon the face  of a blasted world with the 
very blood of the killed and  
the maimed --- diluted with the tears of the bereaved 
mothers and widows! Indeed, they return to the sorrows 
of the mortals (Chyavanti te).  
HOW CAN WE SAY THAT EVEN THOSE WHO ARE 
INVOKING THE ETERNAL BY METHODS WHICH THE 
LAW DOES NOT ORDAIN, COME TO ENJOY THEIR 
CERTAIN FRUITS?... LISTEN:  
  
25. The worshippers of the  DEVAS or gods go to the  DEVAS; 
to the PITRIS or ancestors go the anc estor-worshippers; to the  
BHUTAS or the elements go worshippers of the  BHUTAS; but 
My worshippers come unto Me.  
It is the law-of-life that as  you think so you become. The 
thoughts entertained at a given moment get crystallised to 
form a blue-print for the indi vidual's character formation 
in days to come. This is a fact, very well realisable by 
everyone in his own life. A pplying this natural law of 
psychology in the field of spiritual self-development, Lord 
Krishna says: "VOTARIES OF THE DEVAS GO TO THE 
DEVAS," etc. The worshippers of the Devas, ancestors 
(Pitris), and the elements ( Bhutas), as a result of their 
worship and adoration with single-pointed mind for a 
sufficiently long time, come to  attain the desires of their 
constant meditation.  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
672 
 
Devas, we have seen, represent the various sense-organs, 
through which we experience the world. To indicate the 
work done, by the term deno ting the instrument with 
which the work is executed, is  quite common in life. To 
axe, to scissor, to knife, to hammer, to steer, to pen, etc., 
are examples wherein the name of the instrument is 
employed to indicate the work  done with it. Similarly, 
here also, the plural noun ' Devas,' may be taken to mean 
"the entire field of all phys ical experiences." Those who 
are courting the external world of joys and successes 
consistently and with the required amount of devotion, 
come to gain that field of demanded experiences.  
Accepting the term ' Pitri' as denoting the 'ancestors,' 
'votaries of ancestors' would mean 'persons who are 
enthusiastically alive to the cultural purity and tradition of 
their ancients, and who are striving to live up to those 
ideals.' An individual, who is constantly endeavouring to 
live up to the ancient cultural tradition of spiritual India, 
as a result of his constant self-application, comes to gain 
the beauty and the shine of th e exquisite life of purity and 
perfection.  
The ancient Seers of our land did not overlook the fact 
that, apart from the spiritual aims, in any society, there 
would also be active scientific enquiries and repeated 
discoveries that were possible among the folds of Mother 
Nature's own garments. The active quest in the field of 
"objective-sciences" is a part of man's hunt for knowledge, 
and therefore, the "worshippers of the Bhutas," are the 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
673 
 
secular scientists who try to observe, codify and 
systematize the observed knowledge of physical nature 
and behaviour of things and beings as it is now done 
under such classifications as Physics, Chemistry, Biology, 
Zoology, Botany, Engineering, Agriculture, Politics, 
Sociology, Geography, History, Geology, and so on --- an 
endless array of specialised lines of investigation, 
adopted, pursued and accepted by the modern world. A 
large portion of the Atharvana Veda gave us the accepted 
theories of nature and its behaviour, as finally conceived 
of by the Rishis of that time. The psychological theory, 
which Krishna is observing here, is applicable to all 
branches of human endeavour --- that is, if one were to 
pursue diligently even in the secular field, success would 
be assured in direct proporti on to the amount of self-
application put forth by the seeker.  
Thus, if consistency of meditation upon the Devas yields 
the Devas; if constant meditation upon the "ancestors" 
takes us to our ancestral heritage; and if diligent self-
application in the fields of intellectual enquiry (Bhutas) can 
ultimately assure us a positive success in ripping open the 
secret vaults of nature --- then, according to the same 
principle, we are assured that, "MY VOTARIES COME 
UNTO ME." By constant meditation, with a single-pointed 
mind, upon the nature of the Self, the meditator can, in the 
long run, successfully discover his total identity with the 
Self, Eternal and Immutable. In our elementary text-books 
on Vedanta, this technique of the ego's constant meditation 
on the Self and its ultimate transformation into the Divine 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
674 
 
Self, has been indicated by co mparing it with the manner 
in which a "worm" is transformed into a wasp.  
The attempt of the Geeta is to give, not only the Jnana but 
also to supply the Vijnana. In order to convince the 
student that this elementary technique can take the seeker 
to the highest achievements, th is stanza is given. Just as 
consistent pursuit with all dedicated self-application 
brings, in the end, sure success in all fields of activity of 
art or science, so too, in th e realm of the "within," and 
ultimately in the field of spiritual achievement, constant 
meditation will definitely pay. The logic behind this 
assurance is given here by the Lord.  
CAN MERE WORSHIP WITH DEVOTED THOUGHTS, 
HOWEVER SINCERE, BRING ABOUT SUCH AN 
ABSOLUTE SUCCESS? IS IT NOT NECESSARY THAT 
WE SHOULD PURSUE ALL THE ELABORATE RITUALS 
THAT THE VEDAS PRESCRIBE, AND OFTEN SEEM TO 
INSIST UPON?... LISTEN:  
  
26. Whoever offers Me with devoti on a leaf, a flower, a fruit, 
water, that I accept, offered by the pure-minded with devotion.  
There is no religion in the world which does not recognise 
and encourage offerings by the devotees. The modern 
educated man is rather surprised as to why the Infinite 
Lord, in all religions, needs insignificant things like a 
spoonful of oil for His lamp, or a candle, or even an edifice 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
675 
 
to house Himself --- be it a church, a mosque, or a temple. 
Dreary intellects, poisoned with their own 
misunderstanding, have even come shamelessly to insist 
that these Houses-of-God sh ould be converted into 
hospitals and schools, luna tic asylums and maternity 
homes!  
But I believe that I am talk ing to a world which has not 
reached this nadir of depravity. Not yet. In a society 
where there is still the play of healthy hearts and virulent 
intellects, there is certainly a need for temples and 
worship. And in these Houses-of-God, it is not the 
intricacies of their design, el aborateness of the ritual, nor 
the splendour of gold and wea lth exhibited, nor even the 
number of devotees attending,  that contribute to their 
essential success.  
The very language and diction of the stanza clearly sound 
the note that the material ob jects that one might offer are 
o f  n o  v a l u e  t o  t h e  L o r d  o f  the Universe, but it is the 
devotion and love that prom pt the offerings that are 
accepted by the Deity. Be it "A LEAF, A FLOWER, A 
FRUIT, OR WATER," it is but an insignificant thing that 
you offer; be it a golden temple, or be it a dry leaf, 
"WHOSOEVER WITH DEVOTION OFFERS," whatever be 
the offering, the Lord of Vrindavana assures "THAT I 
ACCEPT." For, when lovingly given, it becomes "A 
DEVOUT GIFT" and when it is offered by a sincere 
"PURE-MINDED" student, the Lord has to accept it.  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
676 
 
There are several carefully coined words in the stanza 
which explain the theory of sa crifice insisted upon in all 
religions. No doubt, the Absolu te requires no offering at 
all from the finite mortals to complete Its Perfection, or to 
maintain Its Infinite Glory. The limited individuals try to 
offer at the Altar of their Lord something that they  
have MISAPPROPRIATED from the Lord's own garden, 
the world. In a public park, a lover often pinches a flower 
from the nearby bush and offers it to his beloved. 
Similarly, a devotee steals something from the Lord's own 
plucks, and offers the same un to Him. In fact, when thus 
we analyse carefully, we know the hollowness of the 
vanity of offering something unto the Lord.  
And yet, this is insisted upon as an important ritual in all 
forms of worship. In offering a flower, or a fruit unto the 
Lord, if the devotee feels that he is making a sacrifice of 
the very thing that he offers, he is misusing the very act. 
The flower, here, serves only the purpose of a spoon in 
conveying something unto th e Lord. While taking soup, 
one, no doubt, lifts the spoon many times to the mouth 
but at the end of the dinner the spoon remains the same as 
before, having finished its wo rk. The flowers and fruits in 
the garden or in the temple , remain the same, but when 
the devotee gathers and carries them to the Altar, and 
offers them, they become th e conveyors of his love and 
dedication unto the Lord of his heart.  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
677 
 
This idea has been brought out in this stanza, when the 
Lord says: "THAT I ACCEPT... THE DEVOUT GIFT OF 
THE PURE-MINDED."  
Therefore, on the whole, it is clear that an offering can be 
efficient, only when it is accompanied by the two required 
conditions; (a) "offered with devotion" and (b) "by the 
pure-minded." To the extent these features are absent, all 
offerings are mere economic waste and superstition-
breeding false-beliefs. If properly done, it can serve as a 
good vehicle to tread the spiritual path of self-
development.  
THEREFORE:  
  
27. Whatever you do, whatever you eat, whatever you offer in 
sacrifice, whatever you give in charity, whatever you practise as 
austerity, O Kaunteya, do it as an offering to Me.  
Through all activities of life one can constantly live in the 
spirit of "devout offering" unto the Supreme. Throughout 
the Geeta it has been, time wi thout number, insisted upon 
that the mental attitude is of supreme importance, rather 
than the mere physical act. And, this is a fact which 
ordinarily the seekers forget.  
All acts of perception and ou r reactions to the perceived, 
be they on the physical, mental, or intellectual levels, 
make them all a "DEVOUT OFFERING UNTO HIM." In 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
678 
 
fact, this is not an unnece ssary make-belief or a mere 
fancied exaggeration. Nor is it in any way, very difficult 
for an individual to practise. The one Self revels 
everywhere: in the teacher, in the devotee and in the Lord. 
In all our life's transactions we behave, act and deal with 
other names and forms, and all of them, we know, require 
the Existence of the Self to uphold them. To remember the 
Self during all transactions of life is to remember the 
Substratum. In a cloth shop where there are cotton clothes 
of different colours and sizes, textures and prices, the 
shop-keeper is advised always to remember that he is 
dealing with cotton clothings. This cannot be very difficult 
for any sane shop-keeper, and it will be safe and profitable 
for him to remember this fact, for it would prevent him 
from entertaining misconcep tions and thereby either 
charging the exorbitant prices of woollens, or selling off 
his goods as cheap as gunny bags! If a goldsmith is asked 
to remember that he is workin g on gold, it is only for his 
own benefit.  
Just as cotton is in all cloth, gold in all ornaments, the Self 
is the Essential-stuff in all names and forms. A devotee 
who can constantly remember the Divine in all his 
contacts in life, is alone the one who can give to life the 
respect and reverence that it deserves. It is a law in life 
that as you give unto life, so shall life give unto you. Smile 
at life and life smiles; frown at life and life frowns at you; 
approach life with due reverence and respect, born out of 
the cognition of the Divine essence in it, and life shall 
respect and revere you.  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
679 
 
When all activities are performed in the Spirit-of-Offering, 
not only our love for the Supreme increases but also our 
entire life becomes sanctified  with a noble purpose and a 
divine aim. In the context of the Geeta's insistence on 
single-pointedness of mind, and devoted contemplation of 
the Self, so far described, we can easily see how this stanza 
provides us again with an efficient and secret method by 
which the seekers are uncon sciously made to remember 
the Supreme constantly --- not in the deep jungles, nor in 
the secret caves, but right in the field of life's contentions.  
WHAT WOULD BE THE EFFECT OF SUCH A MANNER 
OF LIVING LIFE IN THE PU RE SPIRIT OF DEDICATED 
OFFERING?... LISTEN:  
  
28. Thus shall you be freed from the bonds-of-actions yielding 
good and evil "fruits" ; with the mind steadfast in the  YOGA of 
renunciation, and liberated, you shall come unto Me.  
This spiritual goal remaining the same, the "Divine-paths" 
are different; and when the different paths are explained, 
though they look very differe nt from each other, they all 
have the same scientific basis that justifies each one of 
them. At many places in the Geeta, this fundamental basis 
has been directly brought to the recognition of the 
students, while in a few instance s it is slightly veiled; yet, 
careful students can always co me to recognise it. In this 
section, we are in the midst of a discussion on how, by 
living life in a 'spirit-of-offering,' the individual can come 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
680 
 
to claim and finally enjoy th e Highest Perfection which 
meditation promises and the Yajna-spirit guarantees.  
When actions are undertaken without ego, the reactions of 
those actions (Vasanas), whether good or bad, cannot reach 
us, since he who is to suffer or enjoy the reactions would 
be "out-of-station" from th e given bosom. The ego acts, 
and it is the ego that receives the reactions.  
Hence Bhagawan says, "Y OU SHALL BE FREE FROM 
THE BONDAGES OF ACTIONS, GOOD OR EVIL." Since 
the reactions ( Vasanas) arising from fresh actions do not 
add their impressions on to the mind, and since the 
existing impressions ( Vasanas) get wiped out during the 
mind's activities in the world outside, slowly and steadily, 
the mind gets almost a total purgation of all its existing 
Vasanas. In short the mind becomes more and more 
PURIFIED --- the term being used in its scriptural sense. A 
purified mind has more concentration and single-
pointedness.  
The next stage of evolution is  that such a purified mind, 
discovering in itself more an d more discrimination, learns 
to live a life of Samnyasa and Yoga. Both these terms are to 
be understood in the Geeta-wa y. Earlier these terms have 
been very elaborately discussed. Sannyasa or renunciation, 
is not the physical rejectio n of the world, but in the 
language of the Geeta, Samnyasa is the renunciation of: (a) 
all ego-centric activities and (b) all anxieties or cravings 
for the fruits of actions. These two effects would be 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
681 
 
natural in one who is striving  diligently in the world, as 
an expression of his love for the Lord, only to dedicate, in 
the end, all the results unto  the Lord as his humble, 
simple, 'offering.'  
To the one who has come to live the Geeta-Sannyasa and 
has developed, by discrimination, a mind full to the brim 
with purity, Yoga is natural --- especially so, because all 
through the hours of his activity he is constantly 
remembering the SELF, the INFINITE.  
Naturally, such a seeker di scovers that his earlier 
identifications with the false and the consequent sense of 
limitations and pains of morta lity fall off from him and he 
discovers for himself his Divine Nature: "BY PRACTICE 
AND RENUNCIATION YOU SHALL FIND RELEASE 
AND COME TO ME."  
THE SEEKER IS PROMISED THAT HE WILL GO TO 
THE SUPREME. WHAT THEN IS THE NATURE OF THE 
SELF?  
  
29. The same am I to all beings, to  Me there is none hateful nor 
dear; but those who worship Me with devotion, are in Me and I 
am also in them.  
The Self is ONE in all beings; the same Conscious 
Principle illumines the emotions and thoughts in all 
bosoms of all living creatures. "I AM IN ALL BEINGS." 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
682 
 
The same Sun illumines all objects of the world and its 
rays get reflected on all surfaces --- whether the dull, 
rough surface of a rock, or the bright polished facet of a 
jewel.  
TO ME THERE IS NONE HATEFUL NOR DEAR --- If the 
same Self revels in Krishna and Buddha, Shankara and 
Christ, in a lunatic and in a murderer, in the good and in 
the bad, why is it that some  are able to recognise the 
divine status of the Self and others live like worms? In the 
emotional literature, expounding the Bhakti-cult, there is 
always the sentimental explanation that it is because, 
under the Lord's direct grace,  some come to manifest a 
greater amount of divinity. This theory may be 
satisfactory to the few, who do not bring their reasoning 
capacity into the field of religious discussion. But to the 
intelligent ones, this explan ation should appear absurd, 
inasmuch as the Supreme would have to be considered as 
exhibiting partiality to some in the world. To negate this 
imperfect explanation, and to express the purely scientific 
theory, krishna declares here that the Self is the same 
everywhere, always, and that to the Self there is no 
distinction between the good and the bad; the Self 
entertains neither a particular love nor any special hatred 
for any of the living beings.  
This should not be understood as meaning that the Self is 
an impotent factor, inert, and emotionless, with no 
capacity in Itself to bless or to help. Employing the 
analogy of the sunlight whic h we have already examined, 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
683 
 
the idea implied here can be better understood. Even 
though the same sunlight refl ects upon the different types 
of objects in the world, it is true that the quality and the 
nature of the reflecting su rface will determine the clarity 
and the intensity of the light reflected. On a dull piece of 
rough stone there will be the least amount of light 
reflected, while in a bright clean and polished mirror there 
will be, perhaps, the maximum reflection.  
Because of this difference, sunlight cannot be accused of 
having special love for the mirror, or a disgust for the 
rough stone. Applying the analogy to the subjective life, it 
becomes clear that if the spir itual strength and beauty get 
reflected more from the golden-hearts of the rare few and 
not at all from the iron-hearts of the many, it is not 
because the Self entertains in Itself any preference for, or 
any prejudice against, anyone , but it is only a natural 
phenomenon, happening in pe rfect obedience to the law 
of the universe.  
Though in the first line there is a total negation of any 
relationship whatsoever between the Self and the not-Self, 
in the following line, there is a striking idea expressed, 
which as it were smothers the readers with its vivid 
contradiction. "BUT THOSE WHO WORSHIP ME WITH 
DEVOTION ARE IN ME, AND I TOO AM IN THEM." 
Even though the Self has neither any favour for, nor any 
prejudice against the not-Self, to the extent the not-Self 
"WORSHIP ME WITH DEVOTION" they are "IN ME 
AND I TOO AM IN THEM." We can say that the ghost is 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
684 
 
in the post and the post is in the ghost, meaning thereby 
the non-dual nature of the essence and the super-
impositions upon It. Those who worship the Self with 
devotion come to rediscover that the worshippers 
themselves are none other than the Self that is worshipped 
by them. Even while recognising the GHOST the deluded 
one is looking at the POST only; for the POST is the 
permanent "reality" upon wh ich the projection of the 
"non-real" GHOST has been made by the deluded 
observer.  
THOSE WHO WORSHIP ME WITH DEVOTION --- This 
phrase can be initially understood as a mere ritualistic 
injunction, and it calls for a closer and deeper study to 
realise its spiritual implications. Worship is a technique by 
which, in essence, the entire "thought-forces" in the 
worshipper are mobilised and turned to flow towards a 
diviner point-of-contemplation, ever seeking a total 
identity with the Truth so meditated upon. When this is 
done in a spirit of devotion or love, the worshipper comes 
to realise his total oneness with his object-of-worship.  
With this implied meaning well in mind, when we re-read 
the stanza, what Krishna means in this philosophical 
statement becomes amply clear. Even though Truth has 
neither a preference for, nor a prejudice against anyone, 
some noble souls come to experience, and later on exhibit 
in themselves the effulgence of divinity, because, as the 
Lord says, they, through their devoted worship, have 
sought and discovered their oneness with the Divine 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
685 
 
Principle, the Self. Theirs becomes the elegance of the 
Divine.  
A mind, which is pre-occupied with its own ego-centric 
attachments with the not-Self, cannot come to live the 
Bliss-of-Perfection, while, the same mind, when it has 
detached itself from its extrovert preoccupations, becomes 
a ready instrument to seek and to discover its true identity 
with the Self. The condition of the mind declares whether 
the individual is confused or clear, bound or redeemed. A 
mind that is turned outward, rushing out and panting to 
gain its satisfactions in the world-of-objects, gets bound to 
the finite, and comes to groan with pain and 
disappointment; while the same mind when turned 
inward, away from the objects, seeking the Self, comes to 
rediscover its own identity with the Spiritual Centre.  
In winter, inside a room on e suffers from cold, while 
outside there is plenty of sunshine. He who walks out of 
the room into the sunshine comes to be blessed by the 
warmth of the Sun while they  who bury themselves in 
their rooms suffer the discomforts of the cold. The Sun has 
neither a preference for those who are basking under its 
rays, nor has it any prejudice against those who do not 
come out under its shine and warmth. In the language of 
this stanza, we may call those who have walked out to the 
sunny courtyard as "blessed" by the Sun, while those who 
stay indoors as "not blessed" by that luminous energiser in 
the sky?  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
686 
 
Never does the Geeta, at any point, encourage man's 
surrender to circumstances, or to his own debilities and 
incompetencies. As a Scriptur e of activity and optimistic 
endeavour, the Geeta unmistakably emphasizes the 
ultimate supremacy of man over his weaknesses and even 
over his circumstances.  
IS THIS PATH OF SELF-DISCOVERY AVAILABLE 
ONLY FOR THE GOOD?... LISTEN:  
  
30. Even if the most sinful worship s Me, with devotion to none 
else, (or with single-pointedness) , he too should indeed be 
regarded as 'righteous, ' for he has rightly resolved.  
The practice of devotion, understood in the special 
meaning in which it is used in the Geeta, is glorified here 
by indicating its effects upon each individual practitioner. 
In the Geeta, Bhakti is selfless contemplation with a single-
pointed mind upon the non-dual Brahman considered as 
nothing other than the very E ssence in the devotee. When 
this Bhakti is practised for a sufficiently long time, with the 
required intensity and sincerity, the evolution in the 
individual is mapped out here  showing the various stages 
in its efflorescence.  
Ordinarily, there is a vague belief that a vicious sinner or a 
desperate criminal is an outcaste, who can never dare to 
enter the courtyard of heaven. This condemnation of the 
immoral sinner is an unhappy mis-reading of the spirit of 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
687 
 
Vedic literature. THE VEDAS CONDEMN THE SIN, NOT 
THE SINNER. The evil ways of the sinner are but 
expressions of the evil thoughts in his mind, and so, if the 
texture of the thoughts flow ing in his mind could be 
changed, the texture of his behaviour would also be 
transformed. He who has come to keep consistently in his 
mind, thoughts of the Lord, accomplishes, in the warmth 
of his growing devotion, so total a rehabilitation of the 
mental life that he cannot ther eafter carry on his career in 
sin.  
EVEN IF A WICKED PERSON WORSHIPS ME --- Not 
only does the Geeta throw its gates open to the sinners, 
but the Singer of the Divine Song also seems to have great 
missionary zeal to redeem all sinners, and bless them. 
Even those who are given to evil ways are not debarred 
from entering the field of spirituality because of their 
undivine actions and the impurity of their lives. The only 
insistence is that the wors hip of the Self must be 
performed by the devotee wi th "undivided devotion." 
Here the term 'undivided' ( Ananya) can be applied both to 
the 'mind of the meditator' and to the 'goal meditated 
upon.' On the whole, the phrase implies that devotion can 
pay its promised dividend only  when the devo tee, with a 
single-pointed mind, contemplates upon a goal that is 
non-dual and permanent. The non-dual Self is not to be 
considered as different from  the very Essence in the 
devotee himself (Ananya).  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
688 
 
HE SHOULD BE REGARDED AS  GOOD --- Even though 
he has been, till this day, a man of evil ways, wicked and 
cruel, living the life of the senses, uncontrolled and 
passionate, even then, from the moment he has taken to 
the path of contemplation upon the Supreme, with 
devotion, he is to be considered, says Krishna, as 
'SAINTLY AND GOOD.' Such usage of words is common 
to every language, when we want to emphatically assert a 
state or condition to be fulf illed in the immediate future. 
In all such cases, we claim it as a state accomplished, even 
in the present 'baking the bread,' 'making the tea,' are all 
examples when, even while kn eading the flour or boiling 
the water, we refer to these acts with a term indicating 
anticipatory fulfilment. Similarly here, one who has taken 
to the "Path Divine" is called, from that very moment, as 
"GOOD AND SAINTLY" because he will soon ( Acirat) 
grow out of himself to thrive  and flourish in the vaster 
atmosphere of spiritual glory; it is an anticipatory 
statement.  
S u c h  a n  i n d i v i d u a l  i s  t o  b e  c o n s i d e r e d  g o o d  a n d  d i v i n e ,  
"FOR," as Krishna puts it, "HE HAS RIGHTLY 
RESOLVED." In the Life Divine , right resolution is more 
important than mere routine. The majority of seekers only 
plod on their "paths" --- a melancholy brood, like famished 
cattle, treading their way to the meat-market! Such a 
melancholy procession can reach nowhere but the 
butcher's block where Time hacks them into pieces! He 
who steadily walks the path with an iron-heart of 
resolution, open-eyed and enthusiastic, cheerful and 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
689 
 
heroic, alone is noted for sure success and therefore, the 
Flute-bearer emphatically assert s that the rightly resolved 
man of evil ways is to be considered, from the moment of 
his noble decision, as one especially marked out to be soon 
a successful man-of-Perfection.  
HOW DO WE KNOW THAT WHAT YOU ARE 
TALKING IS NOT A BLUFF? WHAT EXACTLY IS THE 
EFFECT OF SUCH A SINGLE-POINTED DEVOTION?  
  
31. Soon he becomes righteous and attains Eternal Peace, O 
Kaunteya, know for certain that My devotee is never destroyed.  
The logical thoughts that lie behind the daring assertion of 
Krishna are being indicated in  this stanza. When a man of 
evil ways takes to a life of single-pointed devotion 
propelled by his ardent resolve, that man "SOON 
BECOMES RIGHTEOUS." The term Dharma was already 
explained as "the Law of Being. " Just as heat is the specific 
quality ( Dharma) of fire, without which fire cannot exist, 
the Dharma of man is the Divine Atman in his heart, 
without which none of his personality layers can ever 
come to express themselves. Therefore, the term 
'Dharmatma,' in the stanza, is not fully expressed when it is 
translated as 'a man of righteousness.'  
Single-pointed devotion and self-application develop 
concentration, and therefore, enhance the subtlety of 
perception of the mind, and such a mind finds its balance 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
690 
 
even in the highest altitudes of meditative flights. "IN 
GOOD TIME," meaning, ere long, he gains glimpses of the 
Infinite experience and thus, comes to live more and more 
as a dynamic saint, wafting the fragrance of divinity 
through his motives, thoughts, and actions.  
This substantial edifice of peace which strengthens and 
fortifies the existence in us, is the tranquillity divine, 
which we come to live as ou r essential being when the 
mind stops its mad revelry among its agitations and 
excitements. There is no religion in the world which does 
not point to this goal, which can be experienced when the 
mind is at rest. A still mind is an open window through 
which man peeps out to see himself reflected in the mirror 
of Truth. The term guaranteeing here that "a true devotee 
soon REACHES the Supreme Peace," is to be rightly 
understood not as a destination that lies far away from us, 
but only as a REDISCOVERY IN OURSELVES OF OUR 
OWN REAL NATURE.  
The perfection indicated in religion lies only as far away 
f r o m  u s  a s  o u r  w a k i n g  s t a t e  i s  f r o m  o u r  d r e a m .  I t  i s  a  
question of rightly adjusting th e focus; if a camera is 'out 
of focus' the photograph wi ll give only a blurred 
representation of fairylan d, while the same scene 
photographed by the same  camera, well-focussed and 
adjusted, gives us the phot ograph in all its gorgeous 
beauty, and wealth of detail. A mind and intellect, mal-
adjusted and incessantly getting shunted among the ever-
rising waves of desires and passions, are not the right 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
691 
 
instruments to cognise and di scover the Truth that lies 
within itself.  
The second line of the stanza brings out the incomparable 
missionary in Krishna, who bursts out into an assertion, in 
his own rising fire and enthusiasm. After declaring the 
truth that even a man of dire evil ways can start his 
pilgrimage on the very day he takes unto himself the firm 
resolve to re-educate his mind, and after indicating the 
stages of his growth, till he reaches the Supreme Peace, 
Krishna, as it were, pats Arjuna on the back and declares 
"MY DEVOTEE IS NEVER DESTROYED."  
Toeing the line of the Rishis, Krishna says that Arjuna 
should declare from house-tops the one unchallengeable 
truth that the seeker of the nobler values shall know no 
failure if his resolve is firm an d if he be sincere in his self-
application. The special phrase, employed here to declare 
Krishna's advice to Arjuna, Pratijaneehi, has, in Sanskrit, its 
own special powers of assertion, and it can express a sort 
of imperative urgency. Those who are students of the 
Sanskrit language can easily perceive it; those who are 
not, may make a note of the same.  
In short, this and the previous stanza together express that 
he who has come to entertain constantly, at least in one 
corner of his mind, a continuous awareness of the Divine 
Principle and allows it to infl uence the rest of his mental 
field, is the one marked out for progress and growth, both 
in his life within and in his life without. Just as a blue 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
692 
 
street light adds a blue tinge to the colour of the dresses of 
all those who pass under it, irrespective of the actual 
colour of their various dresses, so too, in the blaze of 
Divine Awareness, even criminal  thoughts rising in that 
mind would gather the golden hues of godly perfections. 
Just as moth-balls kept in a wardrobe protect all the 
clothes kept therein and keep away all the worms, so too, 
the constant Samarana of the Divine Nature of the Self 
protects the human personality from the destructive 
worms of its inner negativeness.  
FURTHER:  
  
32. For, taking refuge in Me, they also, who O Partha, may be of 
a "sinful birth" --- WOMEN, VAISHYAS as well as  
SHUDRAS --- even they attain the Supreme Goal.  
As an annotation and an explanatory appendix to the 
immediately preceding pair of stanzas, it is added that it is 
not only those who are placed under wrong influences 
and unfavourable external conditions who are redeemed 
by the constant remembrance of the Divine. Those who 
are victims of congenital maladjustments, both in their 
mental make-up and in their in tellectual constitution, also 
can get their equipments readjusted and tuned up 
properly by the same process of constant remembrance of 
the Truth Eternal.  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
693 
 
No doubt, there are expressions in the Vedas, in the 
Puranas, and in the Smritis, which seemingly fall in line 
with the language of this stanza. To condemn women, 
traders (Vaishyas) and workers ( Shudras) as individuals of 
inferior births is equivalent to accepting that religion has 
an effective influence ONLY upon a mere handful of 
members of our society. This would be a denial of what 
Krishna had been hammering upon from the opening 
stanza onward. Therefore, we have to understand the true 
implications of His words as He uses them here.  
Religion is not a technique for developing the physical 
body, nor is it an art to be fulfilled through the play of the 
physical body. The condition and status of the physical 
body have nothing to do with the evolutionary progress 
which religion aims at through all its preachings. The 
spiritual practices contribute to the integration of the mind 
and intellect and to their progressive unfoldment, until, in 
their ripeness, they shed themselves, leaving the Spirit 
naked in all its divine glory. Thus, these terms, as used in 
this stanza, are to be understood as indicating some 
special qualities of the human mind-and-intellect, 
manifested in varying degrees in different individuals, at 
different times.  
The "feminine-minds" (Striyah) are those that have a larger 
share of deep affections and binding attachments. So too, 
there are people, who have a "commercial attitude" in all 
their thoughts and actions an d who live in their mental 
life as traders ( Vaishyas), ever calculating the profits that 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
694 
 
would accrue from all their psychological investments. 
Such a calculating mind, ever looking to the profits that 
could be raised, is not fit for easily evolving through the 
"Path-of-Meditation." To surrend er all fruits of actions is 
the secret of holding the mind still, and of making it live 
vitally, the Infinite, that is the content of a single present-
moment. Thus, when the Science of Spirit-development 
condemns the traders, it is only a denunciation of the 
particular commercial tendency  of the mind. Those who 
fall under the group of 'traders' PSYCHOLOGICALLY 
cannot hope to progress on the Path Divine.  
Lastly, mental attitudes of "slumber and slothfulness" are 
indicated by the term "Shudra" here.  
When we have understood that  these terms, familiar in 
that age, are borrowed by Krishna to indicate special types 
of mind-intellect-equipments, we have understood the 
stanza rightly, without pullin g down the entire Geeta 
from its well-merited pedestal of dignity as a Scripture of 
Man.  
The verse promises that, through constant remembrance 
of the Lord, not are only al l men of evil ways redeemed, 
but even those who are not able to walk the "Path Divine," 
because of some psychological and intellectual debilities 
in them, will be cured and stea dily strengthened to walk 
the "Path" efficiently, if they too, with single-pointed mind 
and sincere devotion, learn to remember continuously, 
and meditate daily upon the Divine Self.  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
695 
 
BORN OUT OF THE WOMB OF SI N --- Sin, according to 
Vedanta, is a wrong tendency in the mind created out of 
the past unhealthy thought and negative living. These 
wrong channels of thought ( vasanas), irresistibly drive 
man to live false values and bring about confusion and 
chaos into his life, as well as into the lives of others. It is 
these wrong tendencies, plough ed on the mental fields, 
that are the sources of the feminine nature of the mind 
(Stritvam), or the commercial attitude of the intellect 
(Vaishyatwam), or the general dullness and somnolent 
morbidity in one's inner life ( Shudratwam). A dull-witted 
pundita alone will have the audacity to commit the folly of 
interpreting this stanza, adheri ng faithfully to the literal 
meaning, conveniently forgetting Sri Krishna's own 
definition of Varnashrama Dharma given previously in his 
discourses.  
In short, when these wrong tendencies are in the mind, the 
Rishis h a v e  d e c l a r e d ,  i n  s h e e r  k i n d n e s s ,  t h a t  i t  i s  u s e l e s s  
for that mind to undertake a study of the Vedas. Therefore, 
such minds were debarred from  doing so. To attain the 
necessary qualification for a successful study of the sacred 
lore, the prescription is Sadhana. Of all the spiritual 
practices ( Sadhana), the most efficient is the constant 
remembrance of the Lord with  a heart overflowing with 
love and devotion ( Upasana). It is the Vedantic declaration 
that through Upasana the mind gets purified --- purified of 
its debilities which are classified and indicated by the 
terms, "WOMEN, TRADERS AND WORKERS."  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
696 
 
When once these negative qualities have been removed 
from a mind, it gains in  its powers of achieving 
concentration, single-pointedness and balance for its flight 
to the very horizons of thought. When once the equipment 
is ready and rigged for the pilgrimage, the destination will 
soon be reached; and therefore, Krishna promises "EVEN 
THEY ATTAIN THE SUPREME GOAL."  
KRISHNA GOADS ARJUNA TO WALK THE PATH OF 
SELF-REALISATION.  
  
33. How much more (eas ily) then the holy  BRAHMINS, and 
devoted Royal saints (attain the goal) . Having reached 
(obtained) this impermanent and joyless world, do worship Me 
devoutly.  
If the above-mentioned mental types are highly 
handicapped in the race for th e divine, Krishna, by a self-
answering question, very emphatically points out here, 
how easy and almost natural Self-realisation and godly 
life must be to those who have the mental purity of a 
brahmin, or the large heart and the clear head of a Rajarshi. 
A king who, having enjoye d intelligently his power and 
wealth, in his complete satiation arising out of his 
growing inner discrimination,  comes to experience the 
inward peace of true contemplation upon the Self, is 
called a Rajarshi.  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
697 
 
After describing all possible types of "heads-and-hearts" 
and after prescribing treatment for all of them to 
rediscover their own Divine Nature, the Lord, concluding 
the section, makes a general statement in the second line. 
"HAVING ATTAINED THIS TRANSIENT AND JOYLESS 
WORLD, WORSHIP ME DEVOUTLY." This instruction to 
Arjuna is an instruction for all,  since, in the Geeta if Lord 
Krishna represents the Self, Arjuna represents the 
confused man standing impotent against the challenges of 
life.  
Life is lived in a field always constituted of objects, 
instruments, and mental moods.  These three are ever in a 
state of change. Naturally, the flickering joys that come to 
us in life prove to be transi ent. And the intervals between 
any two experiences of joy are only FULL OF PAIN.  
In tune with the positive and energising philosophy of 
optimism which the Geeta preaches, here Krishna declares 
the world to be a mere pit of sorrows, or a ditch of 
despair, or a mire of disapp ointments, or a field of 
joylessness (Asukham).  
HAVING REACHED THIS WORLD, IMPERMANENT 
AND JOYLESS, Krishna advises Arjuna, that he must 
occupy himself in the worship of  the Self. In this spiritual 
activity, Arjuna has been we ll encouraged by the Lord 
with his statements that to  a heart that has not the 
weakness natural to the lower evolute but has a wealth of 
poise and understanding whic h are the hall-marks of a 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
698 
 
higher evolute (brahmins and Rajarshis), success is easy and 
sure. Therefore "WORSHIP ME DEVOUTLY."  
HOW THEN AM I TO WORSHIP YOU, MY LORD, 
WHEN I AM TO FACE MY  ENEMIES AND FIGHT MY 
BATTLE?  
  
34. Fix your mind on Me; be devoted to Me, sacrifice to Me, bow 
down to Me; having thus united your (whole) Self with Me, 
taking me as the Supreme Goal, you shall come to Me.  
This stanza is a beautiful su mmary of the entire chapter 
for it throws a flood of lig ht upon many of the other 
stanzas. We may say that this stanza especially serves as a 
commentary to more than one verse in the chapter (Verses 
14 and 27).  
In all text-books of Vedanta (Brahma-Vidya), the technique 
of self-development and self-perfection through the "Paths 
of right-Knowledge and Meditation," has been defined as, 
"Contemplation on That, talk s on That, mutual discussion 
on That --- and thus, to live ev er mentally drowned in the 
Bliss-concept of the spiritual Reality, is called by the 
knowers of It, as the pursuit of Brahman." Keeping this 
classical definition in mind, Vyasa steadily delineates his 
aesthetic "Path of Devotion" in this stanza. The same idea 
has already been brought out earlier in the chapter on 
more than one occasion.  
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
699 
 
With "THE MIND EVER FILLED WITH ME, MY 
DEVOTEE MAKES ALL SACRIFICES, ALL 
SALUTATIONS TO ME," at all times, whatever be the 
type of work that engages him. In brief, the evolution of 
the mind is the very essence of all spiritual reformation in 
life. Neither the conditions in which we are, our 
circumstances and habits, nor the available ways of life, 
nor our past, nor our present --- none of these is a bar for 
evolving spiritually.  
Constant awareness, maintained diligently, is the secret of 
success.  
When thus "YOU TAKE ME AS THE SUPREME GOAL" 
Krishna promises Arjuna, "YOU SHALL COME TO ME." 
We are what we are because of our thoughts. If the 
thoughts are noble and divine, we become noble and 
divine.  
Thus, in the UPANISHADS of the glorious Bhagawad-Geeta, 
in the Science of the Eternal, in the scripture of YOGA, in the 
dialogue between Sri Krishna and Arjuna, the ninth 
discourse ends entitled: THE YOGA OF ROYAL 
KNOWLEDGE AND ROYAL SECRET 
This chapter has been rightl y entitled as the chapter 
discussing the Royal Knowledge and the Royal Secret. 
These two terms have been already discussed at length. 
Earlier in the chapter (Verse 2) we find that, since Pure 
Consciousness is the Knowledge, in whose light all 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
 
700 
 
conditioned-knowledges are made possible, this Science, 
dealing with the Absolute, has been rightly called as the 
Royal-Knowledge. Elsewhere in the Upanishads, it has 
been termed as the "Knowledge of all Knowledges" 
because, "having known which there is nothing more to be 
known," declares Mundakopanishad.  
Om Om Om Om Om 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda 
701 
 
